
--- PAGE 1 ---
arXiv:1510.05836v3  [quant-ph]  7 Mar 2017
Quantum Diﬀerential and Linear Cryptanalysis
Marc Kaplan1,2, Gaëtan Leurent3, Anthony Leverrier3 and María
Naya-Plasencia3
1 LTCI, Télécom ParisTech, 23 avenue d’Italie, 75214 Paris CEDEX 13, France
2 School of Informatics, University of Edinburgh,
10 Crichton Street, Edinburgh EH8 9AB, UK
3 Inria Paris, France
Abstract. Quantum computers, that may become available one day, would impact
many scientiﬁc ﬁelds, most notably cryptography since many asymmetric primitives
are insecure against an adversary with quantum capabilities. Cryptographers are
already anticipating this threat by proposing and studying a number of potentially
quantum-safe alternatives for those primitives. On the other hand, symmetric prim-
itives seem less vulnerable against quantum computing: the main known applicable
result is Grover’s algorithm that gives a quadratic speed-up for exhaustive search.
In this work, we examine more closely the security of symmetric ciphers against
quantum attacks. Since our trust in symmetric ciphers relies mostly on their ability
to resist cryptanalysis techniques, we investigate quantum cryptanalysis techniques.
More speciﬁcally, we consider quantum versions of diﬀerential and linear cryptanal-
ysis.
We show that it is usually possible to use quantum computations to obtain a quadratic
speed-up for these attack techniques, but the situation must be nuanced: we don’t
get a quadratic speed-up for all variants of the attacks. This allows us to demon-
strate the following non-intuitive result: the best attack in the classical world does
not necessarily lead to the best quantum one. We give some examples of application
on ciphers LAC and KLEIN. We also discuss the important diﬀerence between an
adversary that can only perform quantum computations, and an adversary that can
also make quantum queries to a keyed primitive.
Keywords: Symmetric cryptography · Diﬀerential cryptanalysis · Linear cryptanaly-
sis · Post-quantum cryptography · Quantum attacks · Block ciphers.
1
Introduction
Large quantum computers would have huge consequences in a number of scientiﬁc ﬁelds.
Cryptography would certainly be dramatically impacted: for instance, Shor’s factoring
algorithm [Sho97] makes asymmetric primitives such as RSA totally insecure in a post-
quantum world. Even if quantum computers are unlikely to become widely available in
the next couple of years, the cryptographic community has decided to start worrying
about this threat and to study its impact. One compelling reason for taking action is that
even current pre-quantum long-term secrets are at risk as it seems feasible for a malicious
organization to simply store all encrypted data until it has access to a quantum computer.
This explains why post-quantum cryptosystems, based for instance on lattices or codes,
have become a very hot topic in cryptology, and researchers are now concentrating their
eﬀorts in order to provide eﬃcient alternatives that would resist quantum adversaries.
In this paper, we focus on symmetric cryptography, the other main branch of cryp-
tography. Symmetric primitives also suﬀer from a reduced ideal security in the quantum
IACR Transactions on Symmetric Cryptology
DOI:xxx
c⃝IACR


--- PAGE 2 ---
2
Quantum Diﬀerential and Linear Cryptanalysis
world, but this security reduction turns out to be much less drastic than for many asym-
metric primitives. So far, the main quantum attack on symmetric algorithms follows from
Grover’s algorithm [Gro96] for searching an unsorted database of size N in O(N 1/2) time.
It can be applied to any generic exhaustive key search, but merely oﬀers a quadratic speed-
up compared to a classical attack. Therefore, the current consensus is that key lengths
should be doubled in order to oﬀer the same security against quantum algorithms. This
was one of the motivations to require a version of AES with a 256-bit key, that appears
in the initial recommendations of the European PQCRYPTO project [ABB+15]:
“Symmetric systems are usually not aﬀected by Shor’s algorithm, but they are
aﬀected by Grover’s algorithm. Under Grover’s attack, the best security a key
of length n can oﬀer is 2n/2, so AES-128 oﬀers only 264 post-quantum security.
PQCRYPTO recommends thoroughly analyzed ciphers with 256-bit keys to
achieve 2128 post-quantum security.”
Doubling the key length is a useful heuristic, but a more accurate analysis is deﬁnitely
called for. Unfortunately, little work has been done in this direction. Only recently, a
few results have started to challenge the security of some symmetric cryptography con-
structions against quantum adversaries. In particular, some works have studied generic
attacks against symmetric constructions, or attacks against modes of operations.
First, the quantum algorithm of Simon [Sim97], which is based on the quantum Fourier
transform, has been used to obtain a quantum distinguisher for the 3-round Feistel ci-
pher [KM10], to break the quantum version of the Even-Mansour scheme [KM12], and in
the context of quantum related-key attacks [RS15]. More recently, the same quantum algo-
rithm has been used to break widely used block cipher modes of operations for MACs and
authenticated encryption [KLLN16] (see also [SS16]). All these attacks have a complexity
linear in the block size, and show that some constructions in symmetric cryptography are
badly broken if an adversary can make quantum queries.
Kaplan [Kap14] has also studied the quantum complexity of generic meet-in-the-middle
attacks for iterated block ciphers constructions. In particular, this work shows that having
access to quantum devices when attacking double iteration of block ciphers can only
reduce the time by an exponent 3/2, rather than the expected quadratic improvement
from Grover’s algorithm.
In consequence, in stark contrast with classical adversaries,
double iteration of block ciphers can restore the security against quantum adversaries.
These are important steps in the right direction, providing the quantum algorithms
associated to some generic attacks on diﬀerent constructions. These results also show that
the situation is more nuanced than a quadratic speed-up of all classical attacks. Therefore,
in order to get a good understanding of the actual security of symmetric cryptography
constructions against quantum adversaries, we need to develop and analyze quantum
cryptanalytic techniques. In particular, a possible approach to devise new quantum at-
tacks is to quantize classical ones.
Security of symmetric key ciphers. While the security of crypto-systems in public key
cryptography relies on the hardness of some well-understood mathematical problems, the
security of symmetric key cryptography is more heuristic. Designers argue that a scheme
is secure by proving its resistance against some particular attacks. This means that only
cryptanalysis and security evaluations can bring conﬁdence in a primitive. Even when
a primitive has been largely studied, implemented and standardized, it remains vital to
carry on with the cryptanalysis eﬀort using new methods and techniques. Examples of
standards that turned out to be non-secure are indeed numerous (MD5, SHA1, RC4. . . ).
Symmetric security and conﬁdence are therefore exclusively based on this constant and
challenging task of cryptanalysis.
Symmetric cryptanalysis relies on a toolbox of classical techniques such as diﬀerential
or linear cryptanalysis and their variants, algebraic attacks, etc. A cryptanalyst can study
the security of a cipher against those attacks, and evaluate the security margin of a design


--- PAGE 3 ---
Marc Kaplan, Gaëtan Leurent, Anthony Leverrier and María Naya-Plasencia
3
using reduced-round versions. This security margin (how far the attack is from reaching
all the rounds) is a good measure of the security of a design; it can be used to compare
diﬀerent designs and to detect whether a cipher is close to being broken.
Since the security of symmetric primitives relies so heavily on cryptanalysis, it is crucial
to evaluate how the availability of quantum computing aﬀects it, and whether dedicated
attacks can be more eﬃcient than brute-force attacks based on Grover’s algorithm. In
particular, we must design the toolbox of symmetric cryptanalysis in a quantum setting
in order to understand the security of symmetric algorithms against quantum adversaries.
In this paper, we consider quantum versions of cryptanalytic attacks for the ﬁrst time1,
evaluating how an adversary can perform some of the main attacks on symmetric ciphers
with a quantum computer.
Modeling quantum adversaries. Following the notions for PRF security in a quantum
setting given by Zhandry [Zha12], we consider two diﬀerent models for our analysis:
Standard security: a block cipher is standard secure against quantum adversaries if no
eﬃcient quantum algorithm can distinguish the block cipher from PRP (or a PRF)
by making only classical queries (later denoted as Q1).
Quantum security: a block cipher is quantum secure against quantum adversaries if no
eﬃcient quantum algorithm can distinguish the block cipher from PRP (or a PRF)
even by making quantum queries (later denoted as Q2).
A Q1 adversary collects data classically and processes them with quantum operations,
while a Q2 adversary can directly query the cryptographic oracle with a quantum superpo-
sition of classical inputs, and receives the superposition of the corresponding outputs. The
adversary, in the second model, is very powerful. Nevertheless, it is possible to devise se-
cure protocols against these attacks. In particular, the model was used in [BZ13b], where
quantum-secure signatures were introduced. Later, the same authors showed how to con-
struct message authentiﬁcation codes secure against Q2 adversaries [BZ13a]. It was also
investigated in [DFNS13] for secret-sharing schemes. This model is also mathematically
well deﬁned, and it is convenient to use it to give security deﬁnitions against quantum
adversaries, a task that is often challenging [GHS15]. A more practical issue is that even
if the cryptographic oracle is designed to produce classical outcomes, its implementation
may use some technology, for example optical ﬁbers, that a quantum adversary could
exploit. In practice, ensuring that only classical queries are allowed seems diﬃcult, espe-
cially in a world in which quantum resources become available. It seems more promising
to assume that security against quantum queries is not granted and to study security in
this model.
Modes of operation. Block ciphers are typically used in a mode of operation, in order
to accommodate messages of variable length and to provide a speciﬁc security property
(conﬁdentiality, integrity.. . ). In classical cryptography, we prove that modes of operations
are secure, assuming that the block cipher is secure, and we trust the block ciphers
after enough cryptanalysis has been performed. We can do the same against quantum
adversaries, but proofs of security in the classical model do not always translate to proofs of
security in the quantum model. In particular, common MAC and AE modes secure in the
classical model have recently been broken with a Q2 attack [KLLN16]. On the other hand,
common encryption modes have been proven secure in the quantum model [ATTU16],
assuming either a standard-secure PRF or a quantum-secure PRF. In this work, we focus
on the security of block ciphers, but this analysis should be combined with an analysis of
the quantum security of modes of operation to get a full understanding of the security of
symmetric cryptography in the quantum model.
Our results.
We choose to focus here on diﬀerential cryptanalysis, the truncated
diﬀerential variant, and on linear cryptanalysis. We give for the ﬁrst time a synthetic
1Previous results as [Kap14, KM10, KM12] only consider quantizing generic attacks.


--- PAGE 4 ---
4
Quantum Diﬀerential and Linear Cryptanalysis
description of these attacks, and study how they are aﬀected by the availability of quantum
computers. As expected, we often get a quadratic speed-up, but not for all attacks.
.
In this work we use the concept of quantum walks to devise quantum attacks. This
framework contains a lot of well known quantum algorithms such as Grover’s search or
Ambainis’ algorithm for element distinctness. More importantly, it allows one to compose
these algorithms in the same way as classical algorithms can be composed. In order to
keep our quantum attacks as simple as possible, we use a slightly modiﬁed Grover’s search
algorithm that can use quantum checking procedures. This simple trick comes at the cost
of constant factors (ignored in our analysis), but a more involved approach, making better
use of quantum walks may remove those additional factors.
We prove the following non-obvious results:
• Diﬀerential cryptanalysis and linear cryptanalysis usually oﬀer a quadratic gain in
the Q2 model over the classical model.
• Truncated diﬀerential cryptanalysis, however, usually oﬀers smaller gains in the Q2
model.
• Therefore, the optimal quantum attack is not always a quantum version of the
optimal classical attack.
• In the Q1 model, cryptanalytic attacks might oﬀer little gain over the classical model
when the key-length is the same as the block length (e.g. AES-128).
• But the gain of cryptanalytic attacks in the Q1 model can be quite signiﬁcant
(similar to the Q2 model) when the key length is longer (e.g. AES-256).
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. We ﬁrst present some preliminaries on
the classical (Section 2) and quantum (Section 3) settings. Section 4 treats diﬀerential
attacks, while Section 5 deals with truncated diﬀerential attacks and Section 6 provides
some applications on ciphers LAC and KLEIN. We study linear cryptanalysis in Section 7.
In Section 8, we discuss the obtained results. Section 9 concludes the paper and presents
some open questions.
Related work. Independently of our work, Zhou, Lu, Zhang and Sun [ZLZS15] in-
troduced quantum diﬀerential attacks. Their approach is, like ours, based on variations
of quantum search algorithms. In their case, these are quantum counting and quantum
maximum ﬁnding. Their results are, however, less general than ours. They only consider
attacks returning a subkey and not the whole key, and only in the Q2 model. Moreover,
the complexity analysis of our quantum attack is more ﬁne-grained: it considers more
parameters which in principle leads to more eﬃcient quantization of explicit classical
diﬀerential attacks.
2
Preliminaries
In the following, we consider a block cipher E, with a blocksize of n bits, and a keysize of
k bits. We assume that E is an iterated design with r rounds, and we use E(t) to denote
a reduced version with t rounds (so that E = E(r)). When the cipher E is computed with
a speciﬁc key κ ∈{0, 1}k, its action on a block x is denoted by Eκ(x). The ﬁnal goal of
an attacker is to ﬁnd the secret key κ∗that was used to encrypt some data. A query to
the cryptographic oracle is denoted E(x), where it is implicitly assumed that E encrypts
with the key κ∗, i.e., E(x) = Eκ∗(x).
Key-recovery attack. The key can always be found using a brute-force attack; follow-
ing our notations, the complexity of such a generic attack is 2k. This deﬁnes the ideal
security, i.e. the security a cipher should provide. Therefore, a cipher is considered broken
if the key can be found “faster” than with the brute-force attack, where “faster” typically
means with “less encryptions”. Three parameters deﬁne the eﬃciency of a speciﬁc attack.


--- PAGE 5 ---
Marc Kaplan, Gaëtan Leurent, Anthony Leverrier and María Naya-Plasencia
5
The data complexity is the number of calls to the cryptographic oracle E(x). The time
complexity is the time required to recover the key κ∗. We consider that querying the
cryptographic oracle requires one unit of time, so that the data complexity is included
in the time complexity. The memory complexity is the memory needed to perform the
attack.
Distinguishers. Another type of attacks, less powerful than key-recovery ones, are
distinguishers. Their aim is to distinguish a concrete cipher from an ideal one. A dis-
tinguishing attack often gives rise to a key-recovery attack and is always the sign of a
weakness of the block cipher.
Our scenario. In this paper, we consider some of the main families of non-generic
attacks that can be a threat to some ciphers: diﬀerential and linear attacks. We propose
their quantized version for the distinguisher and the last-rounds key-recovery variants of
linear, simple diﬀerentials and truncated diﬀerentials. Our aim is to provide a solid ﬁrst
step towards “quantizing” symmetric families of attacks. To reach this objective, due
to the technicality of the attacks themselves, and even more due to the technicality of
combining them with quantum tools, we consider the most basic versions of the attacks.
Success probability.
For the sake of simplicity, in this paper we do not take into
account the success probability in the parameters of the attacks. In particular, because
it aﬀects in the same way both classical and quantum versions, it is not very useful for
the comparison we want to perform. In practice, it would be enough to increase the data
complexity by a constant factor to reach any pre-speciﬁed success probability. A detailed
study of the success probability of statistical attacks can be found in [BGT11].
3
Quantum algorithms
We use a number of quantum techniques in order to devise quantum attacks. Most of
them are based on well-known quantum algorithms that have been studied extensively
over the last decades. The equivalent to the classical brute-force attack in the quantum
world is to search through the key space using a Grover’s search algorithm [Gro96], lead-
ing to complexity 2k/2. Our goal is to devise quantum attacks that might be a threat
to symmetric primitives by displaying a smaller complexity than the generic quantum
exhaustive search.
3.1
Variations on Grover’s algorithm
Although Grover’s algorithm is usually presented as a search in an unstructured database,
we use in our applications the following slight generalization (see [San08] for a nice expo-
sition on quantum-walk-based search algorithms). The task is to ﬁnd a marked element
from a set X. We denote by M ⊆X the subset of marked elements and assume that we
know a lower bound ε on the fraction |M|/|X| of marked elements. A classical algorithm
to solve this problem is to repeat O(1/ε) times: (i) sample an element from X, (ii) check
if it is marked.
The cost of this algorithm can therefore be expressed as a function of two parameters:
the Setup cost S, which is the cost of sampling a uniform element from X, and the Checking
cost C, which is the cost of checking if an element is marked. The cost considered by the
algorithm can be the time or the number of queries to the input. It suﬃces to consider
speciﬁcally one of those resources when quantifying the Setup and Checking cost.
Similarly, Grover’s algorithm [Gro96] is a quantum search procedure that ﬁnds a
marked element, and whose complexity can be written as a function of the quantum
Setup cost S, which is the cost of constructing a uniform superposition of all elements in
X, and the quantum Checking cost C, which is the cost of applying a controlled-phase


--- PAGE 6 ---
6
Quantum Diﬀerential and Linear Cryptanalysis
gate to the marked elements. Notice that a classical or a quantum algorithm that checks
membership to M can easily be modiﬁed to get a controlled-phase.
Theorem 1 (Grover). There exists a quantum algorithm which, with high probability,
ﬁnds a marked element, if there is any, at cost of order S+C
√ε .
In particular, the setup and the checking steps can themselves be quantum procedures.
Assume for instance that the set X is itself a subset of a larger set ˜X. Grover’s algo-
rithm can then ﬁnd an element x ∈X at a cost ( ˜X/X)1/2, assuming that the setup and
checking procedures are easy. Moreover, a closer look at the algorithm shows that if one
ignores the ﬁnal measurement that returns one element, the algorithm produces a uniform
superposition of the elements in X, which can be used to setup another Grover search.
Grover’s algorithm can also be written as a special case of amplitude ampliﬁcation,
a quantum technique introduced by Brassard, Høyer and Tapp in order to boost the
success probability of quantum algorithms [BHMT02]. Intuitively, assume that a quantum
algorithm A produces a superposition of outputs in a good subspace G and outputs in a
bad subspace B. Then there exists a quantum algorithm that calls A as a subroutine to
amplify the amplitude of good outputs.
If A was a classical algorithm, repeating it Θ(1/a), where a is the probability of pro-
ducing a good output, would lead to a new algorithm with constant success probability.
Just as Grover’s algorithm, the amplitude ampliﬁcation technique achieves the same result
with a quadratic improvement [BHMT02]. The intuitive reason is that quantum opera-
tions allow to amplify the amplitudes of good output states, and that the corresponding
probabilities are given by the squares of the amplitudes. Therefore, the ampliﬁcation is
quadratically faster than in the classical case.
Theorem 2 (Amplitude ampliﬁcation). Let A be a quantum algorithm that, with no
measurement, produces a superposition P
x∈G αx|x⟩+ P
y∈B αy|y⟩. Let a = P
x∈G |αx|2
be the probability of obtaining, after measurement, a state in the good subspace G.
Then, there exists a quantum algorithm that calls A and A−1 as subroutines Θ(1/√a)
times and produces an outcome x ∈G with a probability at least max(a, 1 −a).
A variant of quantum ampliﬁcation amplitude can be used to count approximately,
again with a quadratic speed-up over classical algorithms [BHT98].
Theorem 3 (Quantum counting). Let F : {0, . . . N −1} →{0, 1} be a Boolean function,
and p = |F −1(1)|/N. For every positive integer D, there is a quantum algorithm that
makes D queries to F and, with probability at least 8/π2, outputs an estimate p′ to p such
that |p −p′| ≤2π√p/D + π2/D2.
3.2
Quantum search of pairs
We also use Ambainis’ quantum algorithm for the element distinctness problem. In our
work, we use it to search for collisions.
Theorem 4 (Ambainis [Amb07]). Given a list of numbers x1, . . . , xn, there exists a quan-
tum algorithm that ﬁnds, with high probability, a pair of indices (i, j) such that xi = xj,
if there exists one, at a cost O(n2/3).
The quantum algorithm proposed by Ambainis can easily be adapted to ﬁnding a pair
satisfying xi + xj = w for any given w (when the xi’s are group elements and the “+”
operation can be computed eﬃciently).
Ambainis’ algorithm can also be adapted to search in a list {x1, . . . , xn} for a pair of
indices (i, j) such that (xi, xj) satisﬁes some relation R, with the promise that the input
contains at least k possible pairs satisfying R. If the input of the problem is a uniformly
random set of pairs, it is suﬃcient, in order to ﬁnd one, to run Ambainis’ algorithm on a
smaller random subset of inputs.


--- PAGE 7 ---
Marc Kaplan, Gaëtan Leurent, Anthony Leverrier and María Naya-Plasencia
7
Table 1: Notations used in the attacks.
n
block-size
k
key-size
∆in
size (log) of the set of input diﬀerences
∆out
size (log) of the set of output diﬀerences
∆ﬁn
size (log) of the set of diﬀerences Dﬁn after last rounds
hS
probability (−log) of the diﬀerential characteristic (hS < n)
hT
probability (−log) of the truncated diﬀerential characteristic
hout
probability (−log) of generating δout from Dﬁn
kout
number of key bits required to invert the last rounds
Ckout
cost of recovering the last round subkey from a good pair
C∗
kout
quantum cost of recovering the last round subkey from a good pair
ε
bias of the linear approximation
ℓ
number of linear approximations (Matsui’s algorithm 1)
Theorem 5. Consider a list of numbers x1, . . . , xn with xi ∈X and a set of pairs D ⊂
X × X such that D contains exactly k pairs. There exists a quantum algorithm that ﬁnds,
with high probability, a pair (i, j) such that (xi, xj) ∈D, at a cost O(n2/3k−1/3) on average
over uniformly distributed inputs.
Proof. For a uniformly chosen subset X′ ⊂X such that |X′| = n/
√
k, there is, with
constant probability, at least one pair from D in X′ × X′. According to Theorem 4, the
cost of ﬁnding this pair is O(n2/3k−1/3). Therefore, the quantum algorithm starts by
sampling a random X′ and then runs Ambainis’ algorithm on this subset.
Notice that if the algorithm runs on uniformly random inputs, the set X′ does not
need to be itself chosen at random. Any suﬃciently large subset will contain one of the
pairs with high probability, with high probability over the distribution of inputs.
Before ending this section on quantum algorithms, we make a remark on the outputs
produced by quantum-walk-based algorithms, such as Ambainis’ or Grover’s algorithm.
In our applications, we use these not necessarily to produce some output, but to prepare
a superposition of the outputs. Similarly to Grover’s algorithm, this can be done by run-
ning the algorithm without performing the ﬁnal measurement. However, since Ambainis’
algorithm uses a quantum memory to maintain some data structure, the superposition
could in principle include the data from the memory. This issue does not happen with
Grover’s algorithm precisely because it does not require any data structure.
In our case, the algorithm ends in a superposition of nodes containing at least one
of the searched pairs. It has no consequence for our application, because we are nesting
this procedure in Grover’s algorithm. Alternatively, it is possible to use amplitude ampli-
ﬁcation afterwards in order to amplify the amplitude on the good nodes. However, this
could be an issue when nesting our algorithm in an arbitrary quantum algorithm. For a
discussion on nested quantum walks, see [JKM13].
4
Diﬀerential Cryptanalysis
Diﬀerential cryptanalysis was introduced in [BS90] by Biham and Shamir.
It studies
the propagation of diﬀerences in the input of a function (δin) and their inﬂuence on the
generated output diﬀerence (δout).
In this section, we present the two main types of
diﬀerential attacks on block ciphers in the classical world: the diﬀerential distinguisher
and the last-rounds attack, and then analyze their complexities for quantum adversaries.


--- PAGE 8 ---
8
Quantum Diﬀerential and Linear Cryptanalysis
4.1
Classical Adversary
Diﬀerential attacks exploit the fact that there exists an input diﬀerence δin and an output
diﬀerence δout to a cipher E such that
hS := −log Pr
x [E(x ⊕δin) = E(x) ⊕δout] < n,
(1)
i.e., such that we can detect some non-random behaviour of the diﬀerences of plaintexts
x and x ⊕δin. Here, “⊕” represents the bitwise xor of bit strings of equal length. The
value of hS is generally computed for a random key, and as usual in the literature, we will
assume that Eq. (1) approximately holds for the secret key κ∗. Such a relation between
δin and δout is typically found by studying the internal structure of the primitive in detail.
While it seems plausible that a quantum computer could also be useful to ﬁnd good pairs
(δin, δout), we will not investigate this problem here, but rather focus on attacks that can
be mounted once a good pair satisfying Eq. (1) is given.
4.1.1
Diﬀerential Distinguisher
This non-random behaviour can already be used to attack a cryptosystem by distinguish-
ing it from a random function. This distinguisher is based on the fact that, for a random
function and a ﬁxed δin, obtaining the δout diﬀerence in the output would require 2n trials,
where n is the size of the block. On the other hand, for the cipher E, if we collect 2hS
input pairs verifying the input diﬀerence δin, we can expect to obtain one pair of outputs
with output diﬀerence δout. The complexity of such a distinguisher exploiting Eq. (1) is
2hS+1 in both data and time, and is negligible in terms of memory:
T s. dist.
C
= Ds. dist.
C
= 2hS+1.
(2)
Here, the subscript C refers to classical and s. dist. to “simple distinguisher” by opposition
to its truncated version later in the text.
Assuming that such a distinguisher exists for the ﬁrst R rounds of a cipher, we can
transform the attack into a key recovery on more rounds by adding some rounds at the
end or beginning of the cipher. This is called a last-rounds attack, and allows to attack
more rounds than the distinguisher, typically one or two, depending on the cipher.
4.1.2
Last-Rounds Attack
For simplicity and without loss of generality, we consider that the rounds added to the
distinguisher are placed at the end. We attack a total of r = R + rout rounds, where R
are the rounds covered by the distinguisher. The main goal of the attack is to reduce
the key space that needs to be searched exhaustively from 2k to some 2k′ with k′ < k.
For this, we use the fact that we have an advantage for ﬁnding an input x such that
E(R)(x) ⊕E(R)(x ⊕δin) = δout.
For a pair that generates the diﬀerence δout after R rounds, we denote by Dﬁn the set
of possible diﬀerences generated in the output after the ﬁnal rout rounds, the size of this
set by 2∆ﬁn = |Dﬁn|. Let 2−hout denote the probability of generating the diﬀerence δout
from a diﬀerence in Dﬁn when computing rout rounds in the backward direction, and by
kout the number of key bits involved in these rounds. The goal of the attack is to construct
a list L of candidates for the partial key that contains almost surely the correct value, and
that has size strictly less than 2kout. For this, one starts with lists LM and LK where LM
is a random subset of 2hS possible messages and LK contains all possible kout-bit strings.
From Eq. (1), the list LM contains an element x such that E(R)(x) ⊕E(R)(x ⊕δin) = δout
with high probability. Let us apply two successive tests to the lists.


--- PAGE 9 ---
Marc Kaplan, Gaëtan Leurent, Anthony Leverrier and María Naya-Plasencia
9
The ﬁrst test keeps only the x ∈LM such that E(x)⊕E(x⊕δin) ∈Dﬁn. The probability
of satisfying this equation is 2∆ﬁn−n. This gives a new list L′
M of size |L′
M| = 2hS+∆ﬁn−n.
The cost of this ﬁrst test is 2hS+1.
The second test considers the set L′
M ×LK and keeps only the couples (x, κ) such that
E(R)
κ
(x) + E(R)
κ
(x + δin) = δout. This is done by computing backward the possible partial
keys for a given diﬀerence in Dout. Denote Ckout the average cost of generating those
keys for a given input pair. Notice that Ckout can be 1 when the number of rounds added
is reasonably small2, and is upper bounded by 2kout, that is, 1 ≤Ckout ≤2kout. For a
random pair (x, κ), the probability of passing this test is 2−hout. The size of the resulting
set is therefore expected to be 2−hout × |L′
M| × |LK| = 2hS+∆ﬁn−n+kout−hout. The cost of
this step is Ckout2hS+∆ﬁn−n.
The previous step produces a list of candidates for the partial key corresponding to
the key bits involved in the last rout rounds and leading to a diﬀerence δout after R
rounds. The last step of the attack consists in performing an exhaustive search within all
partial keys of this set completed with all possible k −kout bits. The cost of this step is
2hS+∆ﬁn−n+k−hout.
In practice, the lists do not need to be built and everything can be performed “on the
ﬂy”. Consequently, memory needs can be made negligible. The total time complexity is:
T s. att.
C
= 2hS+1 + 2hS+∆ﬁn−n  Ckout + 2k−hout
,
(3)
while the data complexity of this classical attack is Ds. att.
C
= 2hS+1. The attack is more
eﬃcient than an exhaustive search if T s. att.
C
< 2k.
4.2
Quantum Adversary
We ﬁrst give attacks in the Q2 model, using superposition queries.
4.2.1
Diﬀerential Distinguisher in the Q2 model
The distinguisher consists in applying a Grover search over the set of messages X, of size
2n. More precisely, the algorithm makes 2hS/2+1 queries to the encryption cipher, trying
to ﬁnd a marked element x ∈M = {x ∈X : E(x ⊕δin) = E(x) ⊕δout} . If it ﬁnds any,
it outputs “concrete”. If it does not, it outputs “random”.
With the notations of the previous sections, the fraction of marked elements is ε = 2−hS
and Grover’s algorithm ﬁnds a marked element after
1
√ε = 2hS/2 iterations, each one
requiring two queries to the encryption cipher. The time and data complexities are:
T s. dist.
Q2
= Ds. dist.
Q2
= 2hS/2+1.
(4)
It remains to prove that in the case of a random function, the probability of ﬁnding
a marked element is negligible. Assume that the probability of ﬁnding a marked element
after 2hS/2 quantum queries is δ. Then, this can be wrapped into an amplitude ampliﬁca-
tion procedure (Theorem 2), leading to a bounded error algorithm making (1/
√
δ)2hS/2
queries. Since Grover’s algorithm is optimal [Zal99], we get that (1/
√
δ)2hS/2 ≥2n/2,
leading to δ ≤2hS−n.
4.2.2
Last-Rounds Attack in the Q2 model
An important point of the attack in the Q2 model is that it should avoid creating lists.
Instead, the algorithm queries the cryptographic algorithm whenever it needs to sample
an element from the list.
2For example, using precomputation tables with the values that allow the diﬀerential transitions
through the S-Boxes.


--- PAGE 10 ---
10
Quantum Diﬀerential and Linear Cryptanalysis
The quantum attack can be described as a Grover search, with quantum procedures
for the setup and checking phases. The algorithm searches in the set X = {x : E(x ⊕
δin)⊕E(x) ∈Dﬁn} for a message such that E(R)(x⊕δin)⊕E(R)(x) = δout. This procedure
outputs a message and when it is found, it suﬃces to execute the sequence corresponding
to the checking of the Grover search once more: generate partial key candidates and
search among them, completed with all possible remaining k −kout bits. This outputs the
correct key and only adds a constant overhead factor to Grover search. Notice that using
tailor-made quantum walks, it should be possible to suppress this overhead. Here we use
Grover search to keep the attacks as simple as possible.
The setup phase prepares a uniform superposition of the x ∈X; this costs S =
2(n−∆ﬁn)/2 using Grover’s algorithm. The checking phase takes a value x and must deter-
mine whether (x, x ⊕δin) is a good pair; it consists of the following successive steps:
1. Compute all possible partial keys κout for the kout bits that intervene in the last
rout rounds, assuming that (x, x⊕δin) is a good pair (E(R)(x⊕δin)⊕E(R)(x) = δout);
2. Complete the key by searching exhaustively using a Grover search, checking if the
obtained key is the correct one.
The cost of computing all possible partial keys is C∗
kout. The number of partial keys is
2kout−hout, then completed by k −kout remaining bits. The cost of checking through all of
them is thus C = C∗
kout + 2(k−hout)/2.
The procedure succeeds whenever a message x is found such that E(R)(x) ⊕E(R)(x ⊕
δin) = δout. Therefore, the probability of ﬁnding a marked element is lower bounded by
ε ≥2−hS−∆ﬁn+n. This is the conditional probability of getting E(R)(x ⊕δin) ⊕E(R)(x) =
δout given that the output diﬀerence is in Dﬁn.
The total cost of the attack in the Q2 model is:
T s. att.
Q2
= 2hS/2+1 + 2(hS+∆ﬁn−n)/2 
C∗
kout + 2(k−hout)/2
,
Ds. att.
Q2
= 2hS/2+1,
(5)
with a data complexity identical to that of the distinguisher.
4.2.3
Last-Rounds Attack in the Q1 model
We can also have a speed-up for the last-round attack in the Q1 model. In this model, the
quantum operations only take place after a classical acquisition of the data. In particular,
the data complexity will be the same as for a classical adversary. After the ﬁrst ﬁltering
step of the classical last-round attack, 2hS−n+∆ﬁn couples satisfying E(x) ⊕E(x ⊕δin) ∈
Dﬁn are obtained. The attacker then uses a quantum algorithm to generate the partial
keys κout, and a Grover search among those, completed with all possible remaining k−kout
bits of the key, in order to ﬁnd the key. This leads to data and time complexities of:
Ds. att.
Q1
= 2hS+1,
T s. att.
Q1
= 2hS+1 + 2(hS+∆ﬁn−n)/2 
C∗
kout + 2(k−hout)/2
,
(6)
where C∗
kout denotes the average time complexity of generating the partial keys of length
kout, on a quantum computer.
Let us point out that any classical attack with data complexity smaller than square
root of the exhaustive search of the key can be translated into an eﬀective attack also in
the Q1 model. This is more likely to happen for larger keys, where the limiting terms
are often the second and third terms of T s. att.
Q1
in Eq. (6). See a detailed example in 6.2.
The fact that long keys are more likely to “maintain” the validity of the attacks is an
interesting result, as longer keys correspond to the recommendations for post-quantum
symmetric primitives. In these cases, the Q1 model is particularly meaningful.


--- PAGE 11 ---
Marc Kaplan, Gaëtan Leurent, Anthony Leverrier and María Naya-Plasencia
11
4.2.4
Generating partial keys on a quantum computer
We investigate further the average cost Ckout of generating the partial keys compatible
with some input x such that E(x) ⊕E(x ⊕δin) ∈Dﬁn. These partial keys correspond to
the key bits involved in a transition from Dﬁn to δout.
Using a classical computer and a precomputation table, this usually takes constant
time, but can be up to 2kout in the worst case. It turns out that the worst case this can
be sped up using a quantum computer.
First, when kout < hout, the search is expected to return zero or one key candidates.
In this case, we run a Grover search over the key, with complexity C∗
kout = 2kout/2.
Otherwise, let K = 2kout−hout be the average number of partial key candidates com-
patible with some input x, and denote N = 2kout. Finding one partial key can be done
using Grover search with (N/K)1/2 steps. To ﬁnd the second one, we modify the checking
procedure to exclude the ﬁrst result, and Grover’s algorithm uses only (N/(K −1))1/2
iterations. In general, to ﬁnd the i-th candidate, we need (N/(K −i))1/2 iterations, but
each iteration takes time proportional to √i −1, corresponding to the time needed to
check that the candidate does not belong to the list (i −1) excluded ones. This leads to
the following upper bound on C∗
kout, the quantum version of Ckout:
C∗
kout ≤
K−1
X
i=0
r
Ni
K −i ≈K
√
N
Z 1
0
r
x
1 −xdx = π
2 K
√
N
Neglecting the constant as usual, and replacing with our parameters, this gives C∗
kout ≲
23kout/2−hout.
5
Truncated Diﬀerential Cryptanalysis
Truncated diﬀerential cryptanalysis was introduced by Knudsen [Knu94] in 94. Instead
of ﬁxed input and output diﬀerences, it considers sets of diﬀerences (like the diﬀerences
in the output in the last-rounds attack that we have considered in the previous section).
We assume in the following that we are given two sets Din and Dout of input and
output diﬀerences such that the probability of generating a diﬀerence in Dout from one in
Din is 2−hT . We further consider that Din and Dout are vector spaces.
5.1
Classical Adversary
As in the simple diﬀerential case, we ﬁrst present the diﬀerential distinguisher based on
the non-random property of the diﬀerences behaviour, and then discuss the last-rounds
attack obtained from the truncated diﬀerential distinguishers.
5.1.1
Truncated Diﬀerential Distinguisher
Let 2∆in and 2∆out denote the sizes of the input and output sets of diﬀerences, respectively.
For simplicity and without loss of generality, we assume to have access to an encryption
oracle, and therefore only consider the truncated diﬀerential as directed from input to
output3. We denote by 2−hT the probability of generating a diﬀerence in Dout from one
in Din. The condition for the distinguisher to work is that 2−hT > 2∆out−n. In this analysis,
we assume that 2−hT ≫2∆out−n.
The advantage of truncated diﬀerentials is that they allow the use of structures, i.e.,
sets of plaintext values that can be combined into input pairs with a diﬀerence in Din in
3In the case where the other direction provides better complexities, we could instead perform queries
to a decryption oracle and change the roles of input and output in the attack. We assume that the most
interesting direction has been chosen.


--- PAGE 12 ---
12
Quantum Diﬀerential and Linear Cryptanalysis
many diﬀerent ways: one can generate 22∆in−1 pairs using a single structure of size 2∆in.
This reduces the data complexity compared to simple diﬀerential attacks.
Two cases need to be considered. If ∆in ≥(hT + 1)/2, we build a single structure S of
size 2(hT +1)/2 such that for all pairs (x, y) ∈S × S, x ⊕y ∈Din. This structure generates
2hT pairs. If ∆in ≤(hT +1)/2, we have to consider multiple structures Si. Each structure
contains 2∆in elements, and generates 22∆in−1 pairs of elements. We consider 2hT −2∆in+1
such structures in order to have 2hT candidate pairs.
In both cases, we have 2hT candidate pairs. With high probability, one of these pairs
shall satisfy E(x) ⊕E(y) ∈Dout, something that should not occur for a random function
if 2−hT ≫2∆out−n. Therefore detecting a single valid pair gives an eﬃcient distinguisher.
The attack then works by checking if, for a pair generated by the data, the output
diﬀerence belongs to Dout. Since Dout is assumed to be a vector space, this can be reduced
to trying to ﬁnd a collision on n −∆out bits of the output. Once the data is generated,
looking for a collision is not expensive (e.g. using a hash table), which means that time
and data complexities coincide:
Dtr. dist.
C
= max{2(hT +1)/2, 2hT −∆in+1},
T tr. dist.
C
= max{2(hT +1)/2, 2hT −∆in+1}.
(7)
5.1.2
Last-Rounds Attack
Last-rounds attacks work similarly as in the case of simple diﬀerential cryptanalysis. For
simplicity, we assume that rout rounds are added at the end of the truncated diﬀerential.
The intermediate set of diﬀerences is denoted Dout, and its size is 2∆out. The set Dﬁn,
of size 2∆ﬁn denotes the possible diﬀerences for the outputs after the ﬁnal round. The
probability of reaching a diﬀerence in Dout from a diﬀerence in Din is 2−hT , and the
probability of reaching a diﬀerence in Dout from a diﬀerence in Dﬁn is 2−hout. Applying
the same algorithm as in the simple diﬀerential case, the data complexity remains the
same as for the distinguisher:
Dtr. att.
C
= max{2(hT +1)/2, 2hT −∆in+1}.
(8)
The time complexity in this case is:
T tr. att.
C
= max{2(hT +1)/2, 2hT −∆in+1} + 2hT +∆ﬁn−n  Ckout + 2k−hout
,
(9)
where Ckout is the average cost of ﬁnding all the partial key candidates corresponding to a
pair of data with a diﬀerence in Dout. As mentioned earlier, Ckout ranges from 1 to 2kout.
5.2
Quantum Adversary
The truncated diﬀerential cryptanalysis is similar to the simple diﬀerential cryptanalysis,
except that Din and Dout are now sets instead of two ﬁxed bit strings.
5.2.1
Truncated Diﬀerential Distinguisher
Similarly to simple diﬀerential cryptanalysis, the distinguisher can only be more eﬃcient
in the Q2 model. This comes from the fact that in both cases, the data complexity is the
bottleneck. Since the Q1 model does not provide any advantage over the classical one in
data collection, there is no advantage in this model.
We use Ambainis’ algorithm for element distinctness, given in Theorem 4, in order to
search for collisions inside the structures. If a single structure is involved, the algorithm
searches for a pair of messages (x, y) in a set of size 2(hT +1)/2, such that E(x)⊕E(y) ∈Dout.
Since there is, on average, only one such pair, this can be done using a quantum algorithm
with 2(hT +1)/3 queries.


--- PAGE 13 ---
Marc Kaplan, Gaëtan Leurent, Anthony Leverrier and María Naya-Plasencia
13
If multiple structures are required, the strategy is to search for one structure that
contains a pair (x, y) such that E(x)⊕E(y) ∈Dout. This is done with a Grover search on
the structure, using Ambainis’ algorithm for the checking phase. This returns a structure
containing a desired pair, which is suﬃcient for the distinguisher.
The setup cost is
constant. The checking step, consisting in searching for a speciﬁc pair inside a structure
of size 2∆in, can be done with C = 22∆in/3 queries. Finally, since there is, with high
probability, at least one structure in 2hT −2∆in+1 containing a pair such that E(x)⊕E(y) ∈
Dout, we get a lower bound on the success probability ε ≥22∆in−hT −1. Using Theorem 1,
the total queries complexity is at most 2(hT +1)/2−∆in/3.
Combining both results leads to overall data and time complexities given by:
Dtr. dist.
Q2
= T tr. dist.
Q2
= max
n
2(hT +1)/3, 2(hT +1)/2−∆in/3o
.
(10)
Similarly to the the quantum simple diﬀerential distinguisher, applying the same al-
gorithm to a random function, and stopping it after the same number of queries only
provides a correct answer with negligible probability.
5.2.2
Last-Rounds Attack in the Q1 model
As seen in Section 5.1.2, last-round attacks for truncated diﬀerential cryptanalysis are very
similar to attacks with a simple diﬀerential. The attack in the Q1 model will diﬀer from
the attack of Section 4.2.3 only in the ﬁrst step, when querying the encryption function
with the help of structures. We start by generating a list of 2hT pairs with diﬀerences in
Din, which is done with data complexity:
Dtr. att.
Q1
= max{2(hT +1)/2, 2hT −∆in+1}.
(11)
The second step is to ﬁlter the list of elements to keep only the pairs (x, y) such that
E(x) ⊕E(y) ∈Dﬁn. Notice that such a ﬁltering can be done at no cost. It suﬃces to sort
the elements according to the values of their image, while constructing the list.
Finally, similarly to the Q1 simple diﬀerential attack, a quantum search algorithm is
run on the ﬁltered pairs, and the checking procedure consists in generating the partial
key candidates completed with k −kout bits, and searching exhaustively for the key used
in the cryptographic oracle. In the Q1 model, the quantum speed-up only occurs in this
step.
The average cost of generating the partial keys on a quantum computer is denoted
by C∗
kout. The average number of partial keys for a given pair of input is 2kout−hout. The
fraction ε of marked elements is ε = 2−hT −∆ﬁn+n, the setup cost is S = 1 and the checking
cost, a Grover search over the key space, is C = C∗
kout + 2(k−hout)/2. This gives a total
cost:
T tr. att.
Q1
= max
n
2(hT +1)/2, 2hT −∆in+1o
+ 2(hT +∆ﬁn−n)/2 
C∗
kout + 2(k−hout)/2
.
(12)
5.2.3
Last-Rounds Attack in the Q2 model
In the Q2 model, we want to avoid building classical lists. Instead, we query the crypto-
graphic oracle each time we need to sample a speciﬁc element. This is challenging in the
case of truncated diﬀerential because the use of structures made of lists is crucial. The
idea is to query the elements of the list on the ﬂy.
Case where hT ≤2∆in −1.
It is possible to get 2hT pairs with diﬀerences in Din
with a single structure, S, of size 2(hT +1)/2. The attack runs a Grover search over X =
{(x, y) ∈S × S : E(x) ⊕E(y) ∈Dﬁn}. The checking procedure is the same as for the
quantum simple diﬀerential attack. For a given a pair of inputs, it generates all possible


--- PAGE 14 ---
14
Quantum Diﬀerential and Linear Cryptanalysis
partial keys, and completes them to try to get the key used by cryptographic oracle. This
procedure returns a pair (x, y). The ﬁnal step is to execute the checking procedure in
Grover search once more, suitably modiﬁed to return the key given the pair (x, y).
We analyze the setup cost of the attack. To prepare a superposition of the pairs in
X, we use the quantum search algorithm given in Theorem 5. This algorithm searches in
a list for a pair of elements with a certain property, considering there exist k such pairs.
In our case, the list of elements is S of size 2(hT +1)/2. The total number of elements such
that E(x) ⊕E(y) ∈Dﬁn is therefore 2hT −n+∆ﬁn. The algorithm of Theorem 5 prepares a
superposition of elements in X in time S = 2(hT +1)/3−(hT −n+∆ﬁn)/3 = 2(n−∆ﬁn+1)/3. The
cost of the checking procedure is C = C∗
kout + 2(k−hout)/2, as before. The procedure is
successful whenever a pair (x, y) such that E(R)(x)⊕E(R)(y) ∈Dout is found. Given that
the search is among pairs satisfying x ⊕y ∈Din and E(x) ⊕E(y) ∈Dﬁn, the probability
for a pair to be good is ε = 2−hT −∆ﬁn+n. This gives a total running time:
T tr. att.
Q2
= 2hT /2−(n−∆ﬁn)/6 + 2(hT +∆ﬁn−n)/2 
C∗
kout + 2(k−hout)/2
.
Case where hT > 2∆in −1.
Multiple structures Si of size 2∆in are now required,
where i goes from 1 to 2hT −2∆in+1. We use a Grover search over the structures, to locate
the structure containing a good pair (as previously, we then repeat the attack with the
right structure, but the complexity of this step is negligible). In order to test whether
a structure contains a good pair, the checking procedure uses the algorithm given in the
previous section. When using the full structure with 2∆in values, it has complexity:
C = 2∆in−(n+1−∆ﬁn)/6 + 2∆in−(n+1−∆ﬁn)/2 
C∗
kout + 2(k−hout)/2
.
We also have S = 1 and ε = 22∆in−1−hT , which gives the following complexity:
T tr. att.
Q2
= 2(hT +1)/2−(n+1−∆ﬁn)/6 + 2(hT +∆ﬁn−n)/2 
C∗
kout + 2(k−hout)/2
,
which coincides with the complexity of the previous paragraph (when neglecting con-
stants).
Note that for some parameters (2∆in −1 −n + ∆ﬁn < 0) the expected size of X is less
than 1. In this case, the above procedure is not valid (it would run less than one iteration of
a Grover search). Instead, the checking procedure should run Ambainis’ algorithm to ﬁnd
a pair with output in Dout (with complexity 22∆in/3, because the parameters are chosen
assuming there is a solution), and use the usual key search algorithm with complexity
C∗
kout + 2(k−hout)/2. In this case the complexity becomes:
T tr. att.
Q2
= 2(hT +1)/2−∆in/3 + 2(hT +1)/2−∆in 
C∗
kout + 2(k−hout)/2
.
Note that 2(hT +1)/2−∆in/3 is the complexity of the truncated diﬀerential distinguisher in
the Q2 model. Moreover, with those parameters, 2(hT +1)/2−∆in/3 > 2(hT +1)/2−(n+1−∆ﬁn)/6
and 2(hT +1)/2−∆in > 2(hT +∆ﬁn−n)/2.
Overall, summarizing both cases, we obtain
T tr. att.
Q2
=2(hT +1)/2 max

2−∆in/3, 2−(n+1−∆ﬁn)/6	
+ max

2(hT +∆ﬁn−n)/2, 2(hT +1)/2−∆in	
C∗
kout + 2(k−hout)/2
.
Note that the speedup is always less than quadratic.


--- PAGE 15 ---
Marc Kaplan, Gaëtan Leurent, Anthony Leverrier and María Naya-Plasencia
15
6
Applications on existing ciphers
In this section we describe three examples of classical and quantum diﬀerential attacks
against block ciphers. We have chosen examples of real proposed ciphers where some of
the best known attacks are simple variants of diﬀerential cryptanalysis. This allows us to
illustrate the important counter-intuitive points that we want to highlight, by comparing
the best classical attacks and the best quantum attacks. We ﬁrst consider the block cipher
used in the authenticated encryption scheme LAC [ZWW+14], and build for it a classical
simple diﬀerential distinguisher and a more eﬃcient classical truncated distinguisher. We
quantize these attacks, and obtain that the quantum truncated distinguisher performs
worse than a generic quantum exhaustive search. In the next application we consider the
lightweight block cipher KLEIN [GNL12]. Its 64-bit key version, KLEIN-64, has been
recently broken [LN14] by a truncated diﬀerential last-rounds attack. When quantizing
this attack, we show that it no longer works in the quantum world, and therefore KLEIN-
64 is no longer broken. Finally, we consider KLEIN-96 and the best known attack [LN14]
against this cipher. We show that its quantum variant still works in the post-quantum
world, but only in the Q2 model. These applications illustrate what we previously pointed
out and believe to be particularly meaningful: block ciphers with longer keys, following
the natural recommendation for resisting to generic quantum attacks, are those for which
the truncated attacks are more likely to still break the cryptosystem in the postquantum
world. Consequently, it is crucial to understand and compute the optimized quantum
complexity of the diﬀerent families of attacks, as we have started doing in this paper.
6.1
Application 1: LAC
We now show an example where a truncated diﬀerential attack is more eﬃcient than
a simple diﬀerential attack using a classical computer, but the opposite is true with a
quantum computer.
We consider the reduced version of LBlock [WZ11] used in LAC [ZWW+14]. Accord-
ing to [Leu15], the best known diﬀerential for the full 16 rounds has probability 2−61.5.
This yields a classical distinguisher with complexity 262.5 and a quantum distinguisher
with complexity 231.75. The corresponding truncated diﬀerential has the following charac-
teristics4:
n = 64
∆in = 12
∆out = 20
˜hT ≈55.3
We note that ˜hT > n −∆out, which is too large to provide a working attack. However,
˜hT only considers pairs following a given characteristic, and we expect additional pairs
to randomly give an output diﬀerence in Dout. Therefore, we estimate the probability of
the truncated diﬀerential as 2hT = 2−44 + 2−55.3. In order to check this hypothesis, we
implemented a reduced version of LAC with 3-bit APN S-Boxes, and veriﬁed that a bias
can be detected5. In every structure, the probability that a pair follows the truncated
diﬀerential is 223 · 2hT = 2−21 + 2−32.3, rather than 2−21 for a random permutation.
As explained in Section 3 (Theorem 3), this bias can be detected after examining
2 · 2−21 · 232.3·2 = 244.6 structures, i.e. 256.6 plaintexts in a classical attack (following
4We consider the truncated diﬀerential with Din = 000000000000**0* and Dout = 0000***00000**00.
If the input diﬀerential is non-zero on all active bytes, a pair follows the truncated diﬀerential when 14
sums of active bytes cancel out, and 3 sums of active bytes don’t cancel out. This gives a probability
(15/16)6 · (1/15)14 ≈2−55.3.
5The truncated path for the reduced version has a probability 2hT = 2−33 + 2−40.5.
We ran 32
experiments with 231 structures of 29 plaintexts each. With a random function we expect about 231 ·
29 · (29 −1)/2 · 2−33 = 32704 pairs satisfying the truncated diﬀerential, and about 32890 with LAC. The
median number of pairs we found is 33050 and it was larger than 32704 is 31 out of 32 experiments. This
agrees with our predictions.


--- PAGE 16 ---
16
Quantum Diﬀerential and Linear Cryptanalysis
[BGT11]). In a quantum setting, we use quantum counting [BHT98, Mos98, BHMT02]
and examine 4π · 2−21/2 · 232.3 ≈225.4 structures, for a total cost of 225.4 · 22/3·12 = 233.4.
To summarize, the best attack in the classical setting is a truncated diﬀerential at-
tack (with complexity 260.9 rather than 262.5 for a simple diﬀerential attack), while the
best attack in the quantum setting is a simple diﬀerential attack (with complexity 231.75
rather than 233.4 for a truncated diﬀerential attack). Moreover, the quantum truncated
diﬀerential attack is actually less eﬃcient than a generic attack using Grover’s algorithm.
6.2
Application 2: KLEIN-64 and KLEIN-96
6.2.1
KLEIN-64
We consider exactly the attack from [LN14]. We omit here the details of the cipher and
the truncated diﬀerential, but provide the parameters needed to compute the complexity.
When taking into account the attack that provides the best time complexity, we have6:
hT = 69.5, ∆in = 16, ∆ﬁn = 32, k = 64, kout = 32, n = 64, Ckout = 220 and hout = 45.
In this case, we can recover the time and data complexities from the original result
as7 D = 254.5 and T = 254.5 + 257.5 + 256.5 = 258.2, which is considerably faster than
exhaustive search (264), therefore breaking the cipher.
In the quantum scenario, the complexity of the generic exhaustive search, which we
use to measure the security, is 232. The cipher is considered broken if we can retrieve
the key with smaller complexity.
When considering the Q2 or the Q1 case, the ﬁnal
term is accelerated by square root. On the other hand the second term has a square
root in 2hT −n+∆ﬁn, which is then multiplied by C∗
kout. As shown in Section 4.2.4, since
hout > kout, we have C∗
kout = 2kout/2 = 216 instead of 220. Consequently, the second term
becomes 234.75, thus the attack does not work.
We have seen here an example of a primitive broken in the classical world, but remain-
ing secure8 in the quantum one, for both models.
6.2.2
KLEIN-96
Here we consider the attack of type III given in [LN14], as it is the only one with data
complexity lower than 248, and therefore the only possible candidate for providing also an
attack in the Q1 model.
The parameters of this classical attack are: hT = 78, ∆in = 32, ∆ﬁn = 32, kout = 48,
n = 64, Ckout = 230 and hout = 52. We compute and obtain the same complexities as the
original results in time and data: D = 247 and T = 247 + 246+30 + 290. When quantizing
this attack, we have to compare the complexities with 296/2 = 248.
In the Q1 model, as the complexitites are going to be very tight, we consider the
constants that take into account the cost of a computation with respect to one encryption 9
(the unit of exhaustive search). Then, we obtain 247 + 223+24 · 13
14 + 245 ·
1
14 = 247.96, ,
which is lower that 248 encryptions , so the attack still works. The second term comes
from C∗
kout2(hT −n+∆out)/2, where we can compute C∗
kout as before, obtaining 248/2 = 224.
The constants come from the fact that the computations related to the second term cover
13 rounds out of 14, as the last one is not computed but serves as matching point. The
6For the attacks from [LN14] on KLEIN, hT is always bigger than n −∆in, but the distinguisher from
∆in to ∆out still works exactly as described in Section 5.1.2 because we compare with the probability of
producing the truncated diﬀerential path and not just the truncated diﬀerential.
7The slight diﬀerence with respect to [LN14] is because here we have not taken into account the relative
cost with respect to one encryption, for the sake of simplicity.
8We want to point out that notions “not-secure” (i.e. can be attacked in practice) and “broken” (i.e.
can be attacked faster than brute-force), are not the same, though they are diﬃcult to dissociate.
9For the sake of simplicity, we ignore this constants in the other cases, as they barely change the
complexities.


--- PAGE 17 ---
Marc Kaplan, Gaëtan Leurent, Anthony Leverrier and María Naya-Plasencia
17
third term constant reﬂects that considering only one round out of the 14, many keys are
already be discarded.
In the Q2 model, the ﬁrst term is reduced to 234.17 and becomes negligible, with the
ﬁnal complexity at 234.17 + 247 + 245 = 247.3, showing that the cryptosystem is broken.
7
Linear Cryptanalysis
Linear cryptanalysis was discovered in 1992 by Matsui [MY92, Mat93]. The idea of linear
cryptanalysis is to approximate the round function with a linear function, in order to ﬁnd a
linear approximation correlated to the non-linear encryption function E. We describe the
linear approximations using linear masks; for instance, an approximation for one round is
written as E(1)(x)[χ′] ≈x[χ] where χ and χ′ are linear masks for the input and output,
respectively, and x[χ] = L
i:χi=1 xi. Here, “≈” means that the probability that the two
values are equal is signiﬁcantly larger than with a random permutation.
The cryptanalyst has to build linear approximations for each round, such that the
output mask of a round is equal to the input mask of the next round. The piling-up
lemma is then used to evaluate the correlation of the approximation for the full cipher.
As for diﬀerential cryptanalysis, we assume here that the linear approximation is given and
use it with a quantum computer to obtain either a distinguishing attack or a key recovery
attack. In this section, we consider linear distinguishers and key recovery attacks following
from Matsui’s work [Mat93].
7.1
Classical Adversary
7.1.1
Linear distinguisher
In the following, C denotes the ciphertext obtained when encrypting the plaintext P with
the key K. We assume that we know a linear approximation with masks (χP , χC, χK)
and constant term χ0 ∈{0, 1} satisfying Pr

C[χC] = P[χP ] ⊕K[χK] ⊕χ0

= (1 + ε)/2,
with ε ≫2−n/2; or, omitting the key dependency:
Pr

C[χC] = P[χP ]

= (1 ± ε)/2.
An attacker can use this to distinguish E from a random permutation.
The attack
requires D = A/ε2 known plaintexts Pi and the corresponding ciphertexts Ci, where
A is a small constant (e.g.
A = 10).
The attacker computes the observed bias ˆε =
|2# {i : Ci[χC] = Pi[χP ]} /D −1|, and concludes that the data is random if ˆε ≤ε/2 and
that it comes from E otherwise.
If the data is generated by a random permutation, then the expected value of ˆε is 0,
whereas, if it is generated by E, the expected value of ˆε is ε. We can compute the success
probability of the attack assuming that the values of Ci[χC] ⊕Pi[χP ] are identically
distributed Bernoulli random variables, with parameter 1/2 or 1/2 ± ε. From Hoeﬀding’s
inequality, we get:
Pr
h
ˆε ≥ε/2
random permutation
i
≤2 exp

−2ε2
42 D

≤2 exp

−A
8

,
Pr
h
ˆε ≤ε/2
cipher E
i
≤exp

−2ε2
42 D

≤exp

−A
8

;
both error terms can also be made arbitrarily small by increasing A.
Overall, the complexity of the linear distinguisher is
Dlin. dist.
C
= T lin. dist.
C
= 1/ε2.
(13)
As explained in Section 2, we do not take into account the factor A that depends on the
success probability, and keep only the asymptotic term in the complexity.


--- PAGE 18 ---
18
Quantum Diﬀerential and Linear Cryptanalysis
7.1.2
Key-recovery using an r-round approximation (Matsui’s Algorithm 1)
The linear distinguisher readily gives one key bit according to the sign of the bias: if
K[χK] = 0, then we expect # {i : Ci[χC] = Pi[χP ] ⊕χ0} > D/2.
The attack can be
repeated with diﬀerent linear approximations in order to recover more key bits. If we
have ℓindependent linear approximations (χj
P , χj
C, χj
K, χj
0) with bias at least ε, the total
complexity is:
DMat.1
C
= 1/ε2,
T Mat.1
C
= ℓ/ε2 + 2k−ℓ.
(14)
7.1.3
Last-rounds attack (Matsui’s Algorithm 2)
Alternatively, linear cryptanalysis can be used in a last-rounds attack that will often be
more eﬃcient. Following the notations of the previous sections, we consider a total of
R + rout rounds, with an R-round linear distinguisher (χP , χC′) with bias ε, and we use
partial decryption for the last rout rounds.
We denote by kout the number of key bits necessary to compute C′[χC′], where C′ =
E−rout(C) from C. The attack proceeds as follows:
1. Initialize a set of 2kout counters Xk′ to zero, for each key candidate.
2. For each (P, C) pair, and for every partial key guess k′, compute C′ from C and k′,
and increment Xk′ if P[χP ] = C′[χC′].
3. This gives Xk′ = #

P, C : E−rout
k′
(C)[χC′] = P[χP ]
	
.
4. Select the partial key k′ with the maximal absolute value of Xk′.
This gives the following complexity:
DMat.2
C
= 1/ε2
T Mat.2
C
= 2kout/ε2 + 2k−kout,
(15)
where, as before, we neglect constant factors.
We note that this algorithm can be improved using a distillation phase where we count
the number of occurrences of partial plaintexts and ciphertexts, and an analysis phase
using only these counters rather the full data set. In some speciﬁc cases, the analysis
phase can be improved by exploiting the Fast Fourier Transform [CSQ07], but we will
focus on the simpler case described here.
7.2
Quantum Adversary
7.2.1
Distinguisher in the Q2 model
As in the previous sections, a speed-up for distinguishers is only observed for the Q2 model.
The distinguisher is based on the quantum approximate counting algorithm of Theorem
3. As in the classical case, the goal is to distinguish between two Bernoulli distributions
with parameter 1/2 and 1/2 + ε, respectively.
Using the quantum approximate counting algorithm, it is suﬃcient to make O(1/ε)
queries in order to achieve an ε-approximation. The data complexity of the quantum
distinguisher is therefore,
Dlin. dist.
Q2
= T lin. dist.
Q2
= 1/ε,
(16)
which constitutes a quadratic speed-up compared to the classical distinguisher.
7.2.2
Key-recovery using an r-round approximation in the Q1 model
Each linear relation allows the attacker to recover a bit of the key using 1/ε2 data, as
the classical model. Once ℓbits of the key have been recovered, one can apply Grover’s
algorithm to obtain the full key. For ℓlinear relations, the attack complexity is therefore:
DMat.1
Q1
= ℓ/ε2
T Mat.1
Q1
= ℓ/ε2 + 2(k−ℓ)/2.
(17)


--- PAGE 19 ---
Marc Kaplan, Gaëtan Leurent, Anthony Leverrier and María Naya-Plasencia
19
7.2.3
Key-recovery using an r-round approximation in the Q2 model
Each linear relation allows the attacker to recover a bit of the key using 1/ε data. If there
are ℓsuch relations, the attack complexity is:
DMat.1
Q2
= ℓ/ε
T Mat.1
Q2
= ℓ/ε + 2(k−ℓ)/2.
(18)
Note that we do not a priori obtain a quadratic improvement for the data complexity
compared to the classical model. This is because the same data can be used many times
in the classical model, whereas it is unclear whether something similar can be achieved
using Grover’s algorithm.
7.2.4
Last-rounds attack in the Q1 model
As usual for the Q1 model, one samples the same quantity of data as in the classical
model and stores it in a quantum memory. Then the idea is to perform two successive
instances of Grover’s algorithm: the goal of the ﬁrst one is to ﬁnd a partial key of size
kout for which a bias ε is detected for the ﬁrst R rounds: this has complexity 2kout/2/ε
with quantum counting; the second Grover aims at ﬁnding the rest of the key and has
complexity 2(k−kout)/2. Overall, the complexity of the attack is
DMat.2
Q1
= 1/ε2
T Mat.2
Q1
= 1/ε2 + 2kout/2/ε + 2(k−kout)/2.
(19)
7.2.5
Last-rounds attack in the Q2 model.
The strategy is similar, but the ﬁrst step of the algorithm, i.e. ﬁnding the correct partial
key, can be improved compared to the Q1 model. One uses a Grover search to obtain the
partial key, and the checking step of Grover now consists of performing an approximate
counting to detect the bias. Overall, the complexity of the attack is
DMat.2
Q2
= 2kout/2/ε
T Mat.2
Q2
= 2kout/2/ε + 2(k−kout)/2.
(20)
8
Discussion
In this section, we ﬁrst recall all the time complexities obtained through the paper. The
data complexities correspond to the ﬁrst term of each expression for the diﬀerential attacks.
Next, we discuss how these results aﬀect the post-quantum security of symmetric ciphers
with respect to diﬀerential and linear attacks. As a remainder, notations are given in
Table 1.
Simple Diﬀerential Distinguishers:
T s. dist.
C
= 2hS+1
T s. dist.
Q2
= 2hS/2+1
Simple Diﬀerential Last-Rounds Attacks:
T s. att.
C
= 2hS+1
+ 2hS+∆ﬁn−n
Ckout + 2k−hout
T s. att.
Q1
= 2hS+1
+ 2(hS+∆ﬁn−n)/2
C∗
kout + 2(k−hout)/2
T s. att.
Q2
= 2hS/2+1 + 2(hS+∆ﬁn−n)/2
C∗
kout + 2(k−hout)/2
Truncated Diﬀerential Distinguishers:
T tr. dist.
C
= max{2(hT +1)/2, 2hT −∆in+1}
T tr. dist.
Q2
= max

2(hT +1)/3, 2(hT +1)/2−∆in/3	


--- PAGE 20 ---
20
Quantum Diﬀerential and Linear Cryptanalysis
Truncated Diﬀerential Last-Rounds Attacks:
T tr. att.
C
= max

2(hT +1)/2, 2hT −∆in+1	
+ 2hT +∆ﬁn−n

Ckout + 2k−hout
T tr. att.
Q1
= max

2(hT +1)/2, 2hT −∆in+1	
+ 2(hT +∆ﬁn−n)/2

C∗
kout + 2(k−hout)/2
T tr. att.
Q2
= 2(hT +1)/2 max

2−∆in/3, 2−(n+1−∆ﬁn)/6	
+ max

2(hT +∆ﬁn−n)/2, 2(hT +1)/2−∆in	
C∗
kout + 2(k−hout)/2
Linear Distinguishers:
T lin. dist.
C
= 1/ε2
T lin. dist.
Q2
= 1/ε
Linear Attacks:
T Mat.1
C
= ℓ/ε2 + 2k−ℓ
T Mat.2
C
= 2kout/ε2 + 2k−kout
T Mat.1
Q1
= ℓ/ε2 + 2(k−ℓ)/2
T Mat.2
Q1
= 1/ε2 + 2kout/2/ε + 2(k−kout)/2.
T Mat.1
Q2
= ℓ/ε + 2(k−ℓ)/2
T Mat.2
Q2
= 2kout/2/ε + 2(k−kout)/2
The ﬁrst observation we make is that the cost of a quantum diﬀerential or linear attack
is at least the square root of the cost of the corresponding classical attack. In particular, if
a block cipher is resistant to classical diﬀerential and/or linear cryptanalysis (i.e. classical
attacks cost at least 2k), it is also resistant to the corresponding quantum cryptanalysis
(i.e. quantum diﬀerential and/or linear attacks cost at least 2k/2). However, a quadratic
speed-up is not always possible with our techniques; in particular truncated attacks might
be less accelerated than simple diﬀerential ones.
Q1 model vs Q2 model.
We have studied quantum cryptanalysis with the notion of
standard security (Q1 model with only classical encryption queries) and quantum security
(Q2 model with quantum superposition queries). As expected, the Q2 model is stronger,
and we often have a smaller quantum acceleration in the Q1 model. In particular, the
data complexity of attack in the Q1 model is the same as the data complexity of classical
attacks. Still, there are important cases where quantum diﬀerential or linear cryptanalysis
can be more eﬃcient than Grover’s search in the Q1 model, which shows that quantum
cryptanalysis is also relevant in the more realistic setting with only classical queries.
Quantum diﬀerential and linear attacks are more threatening to ciphers with larger
key sizes.
Though it seems counter-intuitive, the fact is that larger key sizes also mean
higher security claims to consider a cipher as secure. In the complexity ﬁgure given above,
the terms that depend on the key size (the right hand size terms) are likely to be the
bottleneck for ciphers with long keys with respect to the internal state size. In all the
attacks studied here, this term is quadratically improved using quantum computation, in
both models. Therefore, attacks against those ciphers will get the most beneﬁts from
quantum computers. We illustrated this eﬀect in Section 6.2, by studying KLEIN with
two diﬀerent key sizes.
This eﬀect is very strong in the Q1 model because most attacks have a data complexity
larger than 2n/2 (because hS > n/2, hT > n/2, or ε < 2−n/4). If the keysize is equal to n,
this makes those attacks less eﬃcient than Grover’s search, but they become interesting
when k is larger than n. In particular, with k ≥2n, the data complexity is always smaller
than 2k/2.
This observation is particularly relevant because the recommended strategy against
quantum adversaries is to use longer keys [ABB+15]. We show that with this strategy, it
is likely that classical attacks that break the cryptosystem lead to quantum attacks that
also break it, even in the Q1 model where the adversary only makes classical queries to
the oracle.


--- PAGE 21 ---
Marc Kaplan, Gaëtan Leurent, Anthony Leverrier and María Naya-Plasencia
21
The best attack might change from the classical to the quantum world.
Since trun-
cated diﬀerential attacks use collision ﬁnding in the data analysis step, they do not enjoy
a quadratic improvement in the quantum setting. Therefore, as we show in Section 6.1, a
truncated diﬀerential attack might be the best known attack in the classical world, while
the simple diﬀerential might become the best in the quantum world. In particular, simply
quantizing the best known attack does not ensure obtaining the best possible attack in the
post-quantum world, which emphasizes the importance of studying quantum symmetric
cryptanalysis.
More strikingly, there are cases where diﬀerential attacks are more eﬃcient than brute
force in the classical world, but quantum diﬀerential attacks are not faster than Grover’s
algorithm, as we show in the example of Section 6.2.1.
9
Conclusion and open questions
Our work is an important step towards building a quantum symmetric cryptanalysis
toolbox. Our results have corroborated our ﬁrst intuition that symmetric cryptography
does not seem ready for the post-quantum world. This not a direct conclusion from the
paper, though indirectly the ﬁrst logical approach for quantum symmetric cryptanalysis
would be to quantize the best classical attack, and that would simplify the task. As we
know for sure applications where the best attacks might change exist, cryptanalysis must
be started anew. The non-intuitive behaviors shown in our examples of applications help
to illustrate the importance of understanding how symmetric attacks work in the quantum
world, and therefore, of our results. For building trust against quantum adversaries, this
work should be extended, and other classical attacks should be investigated. Indeed, we
have concluded that quantizing the best known classical diﬀerential attacks may not give
the best quantum attack. This emphasizes the importance of studying and ﬁnding the
best quantum attacks, including all known families of cryptanalysis.
We have devised quantum attacks that break classical cryptosystems faster than a
quantum exhaustive search.
However, the quantum-walk-based techniques used here
can only lead to polynomial speed-ups, and the largest gap is quadratic, achieved by
Grover’s algorithm. Although this is signiﬁcant, it can not be interpreted as a collapse
of cryptography against quantum adversaries similar to public-key cryptography based
on the hardness of factoring. However, we already mentioned that attacks based on the
quantum Fourier transform, which is at the core of Shor’s algorithm for factoring and
does not fall in the framework of quantum walks, have been found for symmetric ci-
phers [KM10, KM12, RS15, KLLN16].
We end by mentioning a few open questions that we leave for future work. In this work,
we have studied quantum versions of diﬀerential and linear cryptanalysis. In each of these
cases, we were either given a diﬀerential characteristics or a linear approximation to begin
with, and used quantum algorithms to exploit them to perform a key recovery attack for
instance. A natural question is whether quantum computers can also be useful to come
up with good diﬀerential characteristics or linear approximations in the ﬁrst place.
So far, we have only scratched the surface of linear cryptanalysis by quantizing the
simplest versions of classical attacks, that is excluding more involved constructions using
counters or the fast Fourier transform. Of course, since the quantum Fourier transform
oﬀers a signiﬁcant speed-up compared to its classical counterpart, it makes sense to inves-
tigate whether it can be used to obtain more eﬃcient quantum linear cryptanalysis.
A major open question in the ﬁeld of quantum cryptanalysis is certainly the choice
of the right model of attack. In this work, we investigated two such models. The Q2
model might appear rather extreme and perhaps even unrealistic since it is unclear why
an attacker could access the cipher in superposition. But this model has the advantage of


--- PAGE 22 ---
22
Quantum Diﬀerential and Linear Cryptanalysis
consistency. Also, a cipher secure in this model will remain secure in any setting. On the
other hand, the Q1 model appears more realistic, but might be a little bit too simplistic.
In particular, it seems important to better understand the interface between the classical
register that stores the data that have been obtained by querying the cipher and the
quantum register where they must be transferred in order to be further processed by the
quantum computer.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Commission of the European Communities through the
Horizon 2020 program under project number 645622 PQCRYPTO. MK acknowledges
funding through grants ANR-12-PDOC-0022-01 and ESPRC EP/N003829/1.
References
[ABB+15]
Daniel
Augot,
Lejla
Batina,
Daniel
J
Bernstein,
Joppe
Bos,
Johannes
Buchmann,
Wouter
Castryck,
Orr
Dunkelman,
Tim
Güneysu,
Shay Gueron,
Andreas Hülsing,
et al.
Initial recommen-
dations
of
long-term
secure
post-quantum
systems.
Available
at
http: // pqcrypto.eu. org/ docs/initial-recommendations.pdf , 2015.
[Amb07]
A. Ambainis. Quantum walk algorithm for element distinctness. SIAM J.
Comput., 37(1):210–239, 2007.
[ATTU16]
Mayuresh Vivekanand Anand, Ehsan Ebrahimi Targhi, Gelo Noel Tabia, and
Dominique Unruh. Post-quantum security of the CBC, CFB, OFB, CTR,
and XTS modes of operation.
In Tsuyoshi Takagi, editor, Post-Quantum
Cryptography - 7th International Workshop, PQCrypto 2016, Fukuoka, Japan,
February 24-26, 2016, Proceedings, volume 9606 of Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, pages 44–63. Springer, 2016.
[BGT11]
Céline Blondeau, Benoît Gérard, and Jean-Pierre Tillich. Accurate estimates
of the data complexity and success probability for various cryptanalyses. Des.
Codes Cryptography, 59(1-3):3–34, 2011.
[BHMT02] Gilles Brassard, Peter Høyer, Michele Mosca, and Alain Tapp.
Quantum
amplitude ampliﬁcation and estimation. In Quantum computation and infor-
mation (Washington, DC, 2000), volume 305 of Contemp. Math., pages 53–74.
Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI, 2002.
[BHT98]
Gilles Brassard, Peter Høyer, and Alain Tapp.
Quantum counting.
In
Kim Guldstrand Larsen, Sven Skyum, and Glynn Winskel, editors, Automata,
Languages and Programming, 25th International Colloquium, ICALP’98, Aal-
borg, Denmark, July 13-17, 1998, Proceedings, volume 1443 of Lecture Notes
in Computer Science, pages 820–831. Springer, 1998.
[BS90]
Eli Biham and Adi Shamir. Diﬀerential cryptanalysis of DES-like cryptosys-
tems. In Alfred Menezes and Scott A. Vanstone, editors, Advances in Cryptol-
ogy - CRYPTO ’90, 10th Annual International Cryptology Conference, Santa
Barbara, California, USA, August 11-15, 1990, Proceedings, volume 537 of
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 2–21. Springer, 1990.
[BZ13a]
Dan Boneh and Mark Zhandry.
Quantum-secure message authentication
codes. In Thomas Johansson and Phong Q. Nguyen, editors, Advances in


--- PAGE 23 ---
Marc Kaplan, Gaëtan Leurent, Anthony Leverrier and María Naya-Plasencia
23
Cryptology - EUROCRYPT 2013, 32nd Annual International Conference on
the Theory and Applications of Cryptographic Techniques, Athens, Greece,
May 26-30, 2013. Proceedings, volume 7881 of Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, pages 592–608. Springer, 2013.
[BZ13b]
Dan Boneh and Mark Zhandry. Secure signatures and chosen ciphertext secu-
rity in a quantum computing world. In Ran Canetti and Juan A. Garay, edi-
tors, Advances in Cryptology - CRYPTO 2013 - 33rd Annual Cryptology Con-
ference, Santa Barbara, CA, USA, August 18-22, 2013. Proceedings, Part II,
volume 8043 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 361–379. Springer,
2013.
[CSQ07]
Baudoin Collard, François-Xavier Standaert, and Jean-Jacques Quisquater.
Improving the time complexity of matsui’s linear cryptanalysis. In Kil-Hyun
Nam and Gwangsoo Rhee, editors, Information Security and Cryptology -
ICISC 2007, 10th International Conference, Seoul, Korea, November 29-30,
2007, Proceedings, volume 4817 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages
77–88. Springer, 2007.
[DFNS13]
Ivan Damgård, Jakob Funder, Jesper Buus Nielsen, and Louis Salvail. Su-
perposition attacks on cryptographic protocols. In Carles Padró, editor, In-
formation Theoretic Security - 7th International Conference, ICITS 2013,
Singapore, November 28-30, 2013, Proceedings, volume 8317 of Lecture Notes
in Computer Science, pages 142–161. Springer, 2013.
[GHS15]
Tommaso Gagliardoni, Andreas Hülsing, and Christian Schaﬀner.
Seman-
tic security and indistinguishability in the quantum world. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1504.05255, 2015.
[GNL12]
Zheng Gong, Svetla Nikova, and Yee Wei Law. KLEIN: A new family of
lightweight block ciphers.
In RFID. Security and Privacy - 7th Interna-
tional Workshop, RFIDSec 2011, Amherst, USA, June 26-28, 2011, Revised
Selected Papers, volume 7055 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages
1–18. Springer, 2012.
[Gro96]
Lov K. Grover. A fast quantum mechanical algorithm for database search.
In Gary L. Miller, editor, Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth Annual ACM
Symposium on the Theory of Computing, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA,
May 22-24, 1996, pages 212–219. ACM, 1996.
[JKM13]
S. Jeﬀery, R. Kothari, and F. Magniez. Nested quantum walks with quantum
data structures. In Proceedings of 24th AMC-SIAM symposium on discrete
algorithms, 2013.
[Kap14]
Marc Kaplan.
Quantum attacks against iterated block ciphers.
CoRR,
abs/1410.1434, 2014.
[KLLN16]
Marc Kaplan, Gaëtan Leurent, Anthony Leverrier, and María Naya-Plasencia.
Breaking symmetric cryptosystems using quantum period ﬁnding.
In
Matthew Robshaw and Jonathan Katz, editors, Advances in Cryptology -
CRYPTO 2016 - 36th Annual International Cryptology Conference, Santa
Barbara, CA, USA, August 14-18, 2016, Proceedings, Part II, volume 9815 of
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 207–237. Springer, 2016.


--- PAGE 24 ---
24
Quantum Diﬀerential and Linear Cryptanalysis
[KM10]
H. Kuwakado and M. Morii. Quantum distinguisher between the 3-round
Feistel cipher and the random permutation. In Information Theory Proceed-
ings (ISIT), 2010 IEEE International Symposium on, pages 2682–2685, June
2010.
[KM12]
H. Kuwakado and M. Morii. Security on the quantum-type Even-Mansour ci-
pher. In Information Theory and its Applications (ISITA), 2012 International
Symposium on, pages 312–316, Oct 2012.
[Knu94]
Lars R. Knudsen. Truncated and higher order diﬀerentials. In Bart Preneel,
editor, Fast Software Encryption: Second International Workshop. Leuven,
Belgium, 14-16 December 1994, Proceedings, volume 1008 of Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, pages 196–211. Springer, 1994.
[Leu15]
Gaëtan Leurent. Diﬀerential forgery attack against LAC. In Orr Dunkel-
man and Liam Keliher, editors, Selected Areas in Cryptography - SAC 2015 -
22nd International Conference, Sackville, NB, Canada, August 12-14, 2015,
Revised Selected Papers, volume 9566 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
pages 217–224. Springer, 2015.
[LN14]
Virginie Lallemand and María Naya-Plasencia. Cryptanalysis of KLEIN. In
Carlos Cid and Christian Rechberger, editors, Fast Software Encryption - 21st
International Workshop, FSE 2014, London, UK, March 3-5, 2014. Revised
Selected Papers, volume 8540 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages
451–470. Springer, 2014.
[Mat93]
Mitsuru Matsui. Linear cryptanalysis method for DES cipher. In Tor Helle-
seth, editor, Advances in Cryptology - EUROCRYPT ’93, Workshop on the
Theory and Application of of Cryptographic Techniques, Lofthus, Norway,
May 23-27, 1993, Proceedings, volume 765 of Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, pages 386–397. Springer, 1993.
[Mos98]
Michele Mosca. Quantum searching, counting and amplitude ampliﬁcation
by eigenvector analysis. In MFCS’98 workshop on Randomized Algorithms,
pages 90–100, 1998.
[MY92]
Mitsuru Matsui and Atsuhiro Yamagishi. A new method for known plain-
text attack of FEAL cipher.
In Advances in Cryptology - EUROCRYPT
’92, Workshop on the Theory and Application of of Cryptographic Techniques,
Balatonfüred, Hungary, May 24-28, 1992, Proceedings, pages 81–91, 1992.
[RS15]
Martin Roetteler and Rainer Steinwandt. A note on quantum related-key
attacks. Information Processing Letters, 115(1):40–44, 2015.
[San08]
Miklos Santha. Quantum walk based search algorithms. In Theory and Ap-
plications of Models of Computation, pages 31–46. Springer, 2008.
[Sho97]
P. W. Shor. Polynomial-time algorithms for prime factorization and discrete
logarithms on a quantum computer.
SIAM J. Comput., 26(5):1484–1509,
1997.
[Sim97]
Daniel R Simon. On the power of quantum computation. SIAM journal on
computing, 26(5):1474–1483, 1997.
[SS16]
Thomas Santoli and Christian Schaﬀner. Using simon’s algorithm to attack
symmetric-key cryptographic primitives.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1603.07856,
2016.


--- PAGE 25 ---
Marc Kaplan, Gaëtan Leurent, Anthony Leverrier and María Naya-Plasencia
25
[WZ11]
Wenling Wu and Lei Zhang. Lblock: A lightweight block cipher. In Applied
Cryptography and Network Security - 9th International Conference, ACNS
2011, Nerja, Spain, June 7-10, 2011. Proceedings, volume 6715 of Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, pages 327–344, 2011.
[Zal99]
Christof Zalka. Grover’s quantum searching algorithm is optimal. Phys. Rev.
A, 60:2746–2751, Oct 1999.
[Zha12]
Mark Zhandry. How to construct quantum random functions. In 53rd Annual
IEEE Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, FOCS 2012, New
Brunswick, NJ, USA, October 20-23, 2012, pages 679–687. IEEE Computer
Society, 2012.
[ZLZS15]
Qing Zhou, Songfeng Lu, Zhigang Zhang, and Jie Sun. Quantum diﬀerential
cryptanalysis. Quantum Information Processing, 14(6):2101–2109, 2015.
[ZWW+14] Lei Zhang, Wenling Wu, Yanfeng Wang, Shengbao Wu, and Jian Zhang. LAC:
A Lightweight Authenticated Encryption Cipher. Submission to CAESAR.
Available from: http://competitions.cr.yp.to/round1/lacv1.pdf (v1),
March 2014.
