arXiv:1711.02616v1  [quant-ph]  7 Nov 2017
A quantum primality test with order ﬁnding
Alvaro Donis-Vela1 and Juan Carlos Garcia-Escartin1,2, ∗
1Universidad de Valladolid, G-FOR: Research Group on Photonics,
Quantum Information and Radiation and Scattering of Electromagnetic Waves.
2Universidad de Valladolid, Dpto. Teor´ıa de la Se˜nal e Ing. Telem´atica, Paseo Bel´en no 15, 47011 Valladolid, Spain
(Dated: November 8, 2017)
Determining whether a given integer is prime or composite is a basic task in number theory. We
present a primality test based on quantum order ﬁnding and the converse of Fermat’s theorem.
For an integer N, the test tries to ﬁnd an element of the multiplicative group of integers modulo
N with order N −1.
If one is found, the number is known to be prime.
During the test, we
can also show most of the times N is composite with certainty (and a witness) or, after log log N
unsuccessful attempts to ﬁnd an element of order N −1, declare it composite with high probability.
The algorithm requires O((log n)2n3) operations for a number N with n bits, which can be reduced
to O(log log n(log n)3n2) operations in the asymptotic limit if we use fast multiplication.
Prime numbers are the fundamental entity in number
theory and play a key role in many of its applications
such as cryptography. Primality tests are algorithms that
determine whether a given integer N is prime or not. A
na¨ıve but ineﬃcient solution is trying all the numbers
up to
√
N looking for a factor, which would prove N is
prime if no factor is found and show it is composite if
we have one. There are more eﬃcient ways to test for
primality based on diﬀerent results from number theory.
We are going to use basic theorems which can be found,
together with their proofs, in elementary number theory
books [1–3].
Some deﬁnitions are useful before we proceed.
Let
ZN be the ring of integers modulo N and (a, N) the
greatest common divisor of a and N.
We call Z∗
N to
the multiplicative group of integers modulo N deﬁned as
Z∗
N = {a ∈ZN : (a, N) = 1}. The elements of Z∗
N are
the integers from 1 to N −1 which are coprime to N.
These integers form a group under multiplication.
The order of a ﬁnite group G, |G|, is the number of
elements of that group (its cardinality). The order of Z∗
N
is given by Euler’s totient function ϕ(N) which gives how
many integers 1 ≤a < N are coprime to N.
The multiplicative order of an element a ∈Z∗
N, ord(a),
is the smallest positive integer r such that ar ≡1
mod N.
With these concepts and known theorems from number
theory, we can give diﬀerent tests to check if an integer is
prime or not. A simple test is given by Fermat’s theorem:
Theorem 1 (Fermat) If a positive integer N is prime,
then aN−1 ≡1 mod N for any positive integer a such
that (a, N) = 1.
This is a special case of Euler’s theorem:
Theorem 2 (Euler) Let N be a positive integer, then
aϕ(N) ≡1 mod N for any positive integer a such that
(a, N) = 1.
∗juagar@tel.uva.es
For a prime N, ϕ(N) = N −1 and we recover Fermat’s
theorem.
If we can ﬁnd an integer a for which aN−1 ̸≡1 mod N,
we have proof N is composite and we call a a Fermat
witness for compositeness. Given a, anyone can quickly
check N is not prime. This gives a simple test for primal-
ity. We pick a random a from 1 to N, verify (a, N) = 1
(otherwise we know N is composite) and then check for
Fermat’s condition.
After testing a few diﬀerent ele-
ments, we can declare it prime with high probability.
While this test is simple, there are certain numbers,
called Carmichael numbers [4, 5], which obey Fermat’s
condition for every possible a. Any other integer will fail
Fermat’s test at least half of the times. To see this, we
can use Lagrange’s theorem:
Theorem 3 (Lagrange) Let |G| be the number of ele-
ments of a ﬁnite group G, then any subgroup S of G must
have a number of elements |S| which is a divisor of the
size of the group.
There is a direct application of Lagrange’s theorem to
Fermat’s test. Fermat liars are the integers a such that
aN−1 ≡1 mod N for a composite N. The liars form a
subgroup of Z∗
N. If aN−1
1
≡1 mod N and aN−1
2
≡1
mod N then a3 = a1a2 is also a liar, but multiplica-
tion outside the subgroup breaks closure. The remaining
subgroup properties, like the existence of an inverse, an
identity, associativity and commutativity, come immedi-
ately from the properties of Z∗
N and the multiplication
property we just described.
From Lagrange’s theorem, we see the subgroup L of
Fermat liars must have a size which is a divisor of the size
of Z∗
N. The number of possible liars divides ϕ(N) and,
if there is at least one Fermat witness which shows N is
composite, there must be at least ϕ(N)/2 witnesses. |L|
must have a number of elements ϕ(N)/d, where d|ϕ(N)
(d is divisor of ϕ(N)). For |L| ̸= ϕ(N), d > 1 and |L| is
always equal to or smaller than ϕ(N)/2.
There are also more reﬁned probabilistic tests simi-
lar to Fermat’s which are based on more sophisticated
properties. Most take advantage of Lagrange’s theorem
to show there is at least one witness and, therefore, the


2
subgroup of liars has a cardinality of, at most, |Z∗
N|/2.
By choosing a random a for the test, after a few attempts
with diﬀerent elements, we either ﬁnd a witness of com-
positeness or we can be satisﬁed that there is an expo-
nentially small probability the number is not a prime.
The two most important such methods are the Solovay-
Strassen test [6] and the Miller-Rabin test [7, 8] with liar
subgroups at most a half and a quarter of the total size
respectively. A good description of these and other prob-
abilistic primality tests can be found in Dixon’s review
[9].
Notably, there is also a deterministic algorithm for pri-
mality testing. The AKS (Agrawal-Kayal-Saxena) pri-
mality test [10] is based on a generalization of Fermat’s
theorem which states that:
Theorem 4 A positive integer N is prime if and only if
(x + a)N ≡xN + a
mod N
(1)
for one a such that (a, N) = 1.
The AKS test is deterministic and requires a number of
operations essentially of the order of the sixth power of
the number of bits of N [11].
In this paper, we provide a diﬀerent quantum primality
test based on the converse of Fermat’s theorem [12]
Theorem 5 (Lucas) If
aN−1 ≡1
mod N
(2)
and
ax ̸≡1
mod N
(3)
for any x < N −1, then N is prime.
Apart from Lucas theorem, we make use of a couple of
additional results (see chapter 8 of Burton’s book [2]):
Theorem 6 The elements a
∈
Z∗
N
have an order
ord(a)|ϕ(N) (the order is always a divisor of |Z∗
N|).
Theorem 7 For a prime p and an integer d|p −1, Z∗
p
has exactly ϕ(d) elements a of order ord(a) = d.
We can now restate Lucas theorem as
Theorem 8 (Lucas) If a ∈Z∗
N has order ord(a) = N −
1, then N is prime.
This formulation is contained in Theorem 6. The order
of any element must divide ϕ(N) which is only equal to
N −1 for prime numbers. The only way we can have
order N −1 is if N is prime. Additionally, from Theorem
7, we see there must be exactly ϕ(N −1) integers with
this property. If we can ﬁnd such an integer, we have a
way to prove primality.
There is no known classical algorithm that can deter-
mine the order of an integer eﬃciently. In order to apply
Lucas theorem to primality certiﬁcation on a classical
computer, we need alternative methods.
A solution is
the Lucas-Lehmer test [13] based on:
Theorem 9 (Lucas-Lehmer) If
aN−1 ≡1
mod N
(4)
and
a
N−1
p
̸≡1
mod N
(5)
for any prime p|N −1, then N is prime.
With this and other reﬁnements, there have been multi-
ple proposals for the eﬃcient implementation of modiﬁed
Lucas tests on classical computers. In most of them, we
require a complete factorization of N −1, or, in some,
a partial factorization with large factors, both of which
might be easier than factoring N (if possible). For in-
stance, these tests are particularly easy to perform on
numbers of the form 2m −1 [14] which, if prime, are
called Mersenne primes and include many of the largest
known prime numbers [15]. The reader can ﬁnd many of
these methods in chapter 4 of Crandall and Pomerance’s
book [3].
The tests based on Lucas theorem have the advantage
that they allow us to prove primality. With the Solovay-
Strassen or the Rabin-Miller test we could only give a
witness of compositeness, but there was no eﬃcient way
to show N was prime with certainty.
A certiﬁcate of primality for N is a collection of data
which allows anyone to prove N is prime, ideally with few
operations on short certiﬁcates with a number of bits of
the order of log(N). For instance, if we have a complete
factorization of N −1, a list of the factors and an element
a ∈Z∗
N with ord(a) = N −1 give a fast way to show N
is prime using the Lucas-Lehmer Theorem. In principle,
we can always use the AKS test to check if a number
is prime and, from a certain point of view, N is itself a
valid certiﬁcate of primality. However, for large integers,
there exist more eﬃcient ways to prove primality if we
can factor N−1. Pratt certiﬁcates were the ﬁrst examples
[16] and there are primality proofs requiring only O(log p)
multiplications modulo p for any prime p [17].
At this point, it is interesting to turn to quantum
computers.
Shor’s algorithm gives an eﬃcient way to
factor composite integers of n bits with a number of
expected operations O((log n)n3) operations [18] which
can become O(log log n(log n)2n2) with fast multiplica-
tion circuits. The quantum primality test of Chau and Lo
[19] combines Shor’s quantum factoring algorithm with
the Lucas-Lehmer test to prove primality in an expected
number of operations O(n3 log n log log n), essentially cu-
bic with the number of bits of N. Using quantum factor-
ing has the nice side eﬀect of producing a succint certiﬁ-
cate of primality with the results.
Here, we propose a new quantum primality testing al-
gorithm inspired by Shor’s algorithm. By using directly
the quantum order ﬁnding algorithm behind Shor’s fac-
toring and discrete logarithm algorithms, we can reduce
the number of quantum operations. Instead of factoring
N −1, we check the order of diﬀerent elements in Z∗
N


3
until we ﬁnd one with order N −1 or a witness that N
is composite.
This also contrasts with the quantum primality test of
Carlini and Hosoya [20], which applies the concepts of
quantum counting and quantum period ﬁnding to give
an improved version of the Miller-Rabin test.
While we reduce the number of quantum operations,
we loose the classical certiﬁcate of primality of the Chau-
Lo test. Instead, we can give a quantum certiﬁcate of
primality. Any of the ϕ(N −1) elements a ∈Z∗
N with
ord(a) = N −1 serves to prove N is prime to anyone
with a quantum computer, which can ﬁnd the order of a
eﬃciently.
We deal with numbers 2n−1 < N ≤2n represented
with n bits.
We consider quantum order ﬁnding as a
black box which requires O((log n)n3) operations and see
that, on average, with log n uses of the black box we can
ﬁnd an element of order N −1 and prove N is prime when
it is or show it must be composite with high probability,
with a proof of compositeness in most cases.
Algorithm 1 Quantum primality test
1: Choose at random an integer 1 < a < N.
2: Compute (a, N):
3: if (a, N) ̸= 1 then
4:
Declare N composite; return factor (a, N) as a proof.
5: else if (a, N) = 1 then
6:
Compute a
N−1
2
:
7:
if a
N−1
2
̸≡±1 mod N then
8:
Declare N composite; return a as a witness.
9:
else if a
N−1
2
≡1 mod N then
10:
Go back to Step 1.
11:
else if a
N−1
2
≡−1 mod N then
12:
QUANTUM ORDER FINDING. Compute ord(a):
13:
if ord(a) = N −1 then
14:
Declare N prime; return a as a quantum cer-
tiﬁcate of primality.
15:
else
16:
Go back to Step 1.
17:
end if
18:
end if
19: end if
The proposed algorithm (Algorithm 1) checks the or-
der of random integers in the group until it can prove
either primality or compositeness. First we choose an in-
teger at random from Z∗
N, excluding a = 1 which has a
trivial order 1. We do that by taking an integer smaller
than N and checking (a, N) = 1. If it is not, we have a
factor of N and we can declare N composite and give the
factor as proof. Before going into the quantum part, we
perform a basic screening to reduce the number of quan-
tum operations, which are the most challenging in terms
of technology, and replace them by classical steps.
We need to check aN−1 ≡1 mod N. Instead of per-
forming this Fermat test directly, we check a
N−1
2 , which
should be ±1 if a passes Fermat’s test. Otherwise, N
cannot be prime and we return a as a primality witness
for the Fermat test. If a
N−1
2
≡1 mod N, the order of a
is, at most, N−1
2 , which gives no information on whether
N is prime or not. Then we start again and choose a new
random integer. We only proceed if a
N−1
2
≡−1 mod N.
At this point, we need to resort to the quantum order
ﬁnding algorithm. If ord(a) = N −1 the number is prime
with certainty and we can stop the procedure and return
a as a quantum certiﬁcate of primality.
The classical screening guarantees ord(a)|N −1. This
follows from the condition a
N−1
2
≡−1 mod N, which
means aN−1 ≡1 mod N, and from [2]:
Theorem 10 Let a ∈Z∗
N have order ord(a). Then ah ≡
1 mod N if and only if ord(a)|h.
If ord(a) ̸= N −1, we cannot tell anything about N. We
need to start again the search with a new element.
The average number of iterations before ﬁnding an el-
ement of order N −1 when N is prime is of the order of
log log N. From Theorem 7, we know there are ϕ(N −1)
elements of order N −1 among the N −1 elements of Z∗
N.
The probability of ﬁnding an element which conﬁrms pri-
mality at each iteration is
ϕ(N −1)
N −1
>
1
3 log log(N −1)
(6)
for a large enough N. In order to prove this bound we
can turn to known estimations, starting from the lower
bound [21]:
ϕ(M)
M
>
1
eγ log log M +
2.50637
log log M
(7)
where γ ≈0.57721 is the Euler-Mascheroni constant and
eγ ≈1.781. For M > ee
√2.50637
3−1.781 ≈49.2 there is a lower
bound
ϕ(M)
M
>
1
3 log log M ,
(8)
which tells us that for a prime N of n ≥6 bits Equation
(6) will be valid. With 3 log log(N −1) attempts we have
a high probability of ﬁnding an element of order N −1.
While there is some room to improve the estimate, in the
general case we cannot give a much tighter bound as it
is known that for inﬁnitely many integers
ϕ(M)
M
<
1
eγ log log M <
0.562
log log M
(9)
will hold [22]. We need a number of repetitions logarith-
mic with the number of bits of the integer under test.
The complexity of each iteration is determined by the
order ﬁnding subroutine.
Quantum order ﬁnding requires O((log n)n3) quantum
operations, with O(log n) uses of modular exponentia-
tion. The quantum order ﬁnding subroutine of Shor has
two main steps: modular exponentiation and a Quantum


4
Fourier Transform.
The Quantum Fourier Transform
circuit is quadratic in n [18].
Modular exponentiation
with the binary method needs O(n) multiplications [23].
There are many quadratic quantum multiplication cir-
cuits, for instance [24, 25], which gives a total complexity
of O(n3) for exponentiation. In principle, with fast mul-
tiplication using the Sch¨onhage-Strassen algorithm [26],
for which there is a quantum circuit [27], the total com-
plexity for order ﬁnding would be O(log log n(log n)2n2).
However, the constant factors involved make it only
worthwhile in the asymptotic limit for very large N [28].
The number of operations in the classical part is also
dominated by modular exponentiation. Computing the
greatest common divisor of two integers up to n bits using
Euclid’s algorithm has a complexity O(n2) and there are
faster modern methods (see chapter 4 of [29]). The total
expected complexity of our algorithm is O((log n)2n3) for
the log n repetitions needed to ﬁnd an element of order
N −1 with high probability. For very large N we can
use fast multiplication to have an expected number of
operations O(log log n(log n)3n2).
The screening in line 7 of the algorithm identiﬁes N
is not prime when ord(a) ̸ | N −1, but it is possible
for N to be composite and still give inconclusive results
when tested. For instance, Carmichael numbers satisfy
aN−1 ≡1 mod N for all a such that (a, N) = 1 and,
from Theorem 10, ord(a)|N −1 for all a ∈Z∗
N. In any
case, the order will be smaller than N −1 and, after
3 log n tested elements, we can say that N is composite
with high probability and stop there to avoid entering an
inﬁnite loop.
In order to reduce the number of quantum operations,
we can introduce a previous classical selection phase that
uses the Miller-Rabin test.
The elements a ∈Z∗
N for
which a
N−1
2
≡±1 mod N for a composite N are some-
times called Euler liars [30]. Euler liars are a subgroup
of Fermat liars, the a for which a composite N passes
the Fermat test. We can impose harder constraints on
the integers that survive to the quantum part of the algo-
rithm. For a composite number N with N−1 = 2sd, with
odd d, the bases for which ad ≡1 mod N or ad2r ≡−1
mod N for some 0 ≤r < s are called strong liars. For
a prime N the condition always holds, but, if N is com-
posite, at most one fourth of the a ∈Z∗
N are strong liars
[8]. If we perform a classical Rabin-Miller test on k ran-
dom bases and do not ﬁnd a witness for compositeness,
the probability of N not being prime is bounded by 4−k
and we are left with a collection of k elements of order
ord(a)|N −1.
We can discard the bases with ad ≡1
mod N, which have order d < N −1, and use the rest of
the elements in the quantum order ﬁnding subroutine.
Finally, we can further reduce the number of steps with
some insights from the analysis of quantum order ﬁnd-
ing. The factor log n which appears in the complexity of
quantum order ﬁnding is due to the average number of
times we have to measure in order to ﬁnd two divisors
of the order from which we can deduce its exact value,
ord(a). However, with some classical processing testing
small multiples of the values extracted from each mea-
surement, it is possible to reduce the log n repetitions to
a constant number [18].
The algorithm we have proposed oﬀers an alternative
quantum primality test which harnesses quantum order
ﬁnding to give a direct proof an integer is prime by pro-
ducing an element a ∈Z∗
N with order N −1. The quan-
tum part uses the same circuits as Shor’s factoring algo-
rithm and it could serve as a previous stage when fac-
toring on a quantum machine. Shor’s algorithm requires
its input integer N not to be of the form pk or 2pk for
a prime p and an integer k ≥1.
For odd inputs, we
only need to worry about detecting primes. There are
classical eﬃcient methods to detect prime powers pk for
k ≥2 [31], but we can also use a modiﬁed version of
our quantum primality test. Theorems 6 and 7 can be
generalized to show that an integer N > 1 has an ele-
ment of order ϕ(N), called a primitive root, only when
N = 2, 4, pk or p2k, in which case there are ϕ(ϕ(N)) of
them (chapter 4 of [2]). The analysis then is essentially
the same we have used in our primality test. For N = pk,
ϕ(N) = pk−1(p −1). If we ﬁnd a primitive root, its or-
der ord(a) gives (ord(a), N) = pk−1 ̸= 1, which factors
N. We can check by repeated division by p =
N
(ord(a),N)
that N is a prime power.
The number of divisions is
polynomial in the number of bits of N and the bound of
log n order ﬁnding steps is still valid. The probability of
ﬁnding a primitive root is ϕ(ϕ(N))
ϕ(N)
and 3 log log ϕ(N) rep-
etitions give a high probability of getting a valid basis.
ϕ(N) ≤N −1, so our bound for the primes also holds in
this situation.
Our
algorithm
reduces
the
asymptotic
complex-
ity
of
the
Chau-Lo
quantum
primality
test
from
O((log n)(log log n)n3) to O((log log n)(log n)3n2) at the
cost of replacing the classical primality certiﬁcate which
includes the factors of N −1 by a quantum certiﬁcate
of primality consisting in an element a of order N −1,
which can be checked on a quantum computer. The test
can prove with certainty that a given integer is prime
and it can be complemented with the Miller-Rabin test
in the initial screening stage to also identify composite
numbers with high probability. Our test has a complex-
ity comparable to classical tests for compositeness which
can convince us a number is prime with an exponentially
small probability of error. Its complexity is essentially
quadratic in the asymptotic limit, which is more eﬃcient
than classical tests that prove primality with certainty,
which are usually restricted to integers of a particular
form, or require a number of operations of the order of
the sixth power of the number of bits (AKS test).
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work has been funded by Spanish Ministerio de
Econom´ıa y Competitividad, Project TEC2015-69665-R,
MINECO/FEDER, UE and Junta de Castilla y Le´on
VA089U16.


5
[1] A. J. Menezes, S. A. Vanstone, and P. C. van Oorschot,
Handbook of Applied Cryptography, 1st ed. (CRC Press,
Inc., Boca Raton, FL, USA, 1996).
[2] D. M. Burton, Elementary Number Theory, 6th ed.
(McGraw-Hill Higher Education, 2005).
[3] R. Crandall and C. Pomerance, Prime Numbers: A Com-
putational Perspective (Springer New York, New York,
NY, 2005).
[4] R. D. Carmichael, “On composite numbers P which sat-
isfy the Fermat congruence aP −1 ≡1 mod P,” The
American Mathematical Monthly 19, 22–27 (1912).
[5] W. R. Alford, A. Granville, and C. Pomerance, “There
are inﬁnitely many Carmichael numbers,” Annals of
Mathematics 139, 703–722 (1994).
[6] R. Solovay and V. Strassen, “A fast Monte-Carlo test for
primality,” SIAM Journal on Computing 6, 84–85 (1977).
[7] G. L. Miller, “Riemann’s hypothesis and tests for primal-
ity,” in Proceedings of the Seventh Annual ACM Sympo-
sium on Theory of Computing, STOC ’75 (ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 1975) pp. 234–239.
[8] M. O. Rabin, “Probabilistic algorithm for testing primal-
ity,” Journal of Number Theory 12, 128 – 138 (1980).
[9] J. D. Dixon, “Factorization and primality tests,” The
American Mathematical Monthly 91, 333–352 (1984).
[10] M. Agrawal, N. Kayal, and N. Saxena, “PRIMES is in
P,” Annals of Mathematics 160, 781–793 (2004).
[11] H.
W.
Lenstra
and
C.
Pomerance,
“Primal-
ity
testing
with
Gaussian
periods,”
preprint:
https://www.math.dartmouth.edu/ carlp/aks240817.pdf
(2003).
[12] E. Lucas, “Th´eorie des fonctions num´eriques simple-
ment p´eriodiques,” American Journal of Mathematics 1,
289–321 (1878).
[13] D. H. Lehmer, “Tests for primality by the converse of Fer-
mat’s theorem,” Bulletin of the American Mathematical
Society 33, 327–340 (1927).
[14] John Brillhart, D. H. Lehmer, and J. L. Selfridge, “New
primality criteria and factorizations of 2m ± 1,” Mathe-
matics of Computation 29, 620–647 (1975).
[15] Collective work, “The Great Internet Mersenne Prime
Search (GIMPS),” online:
https://www.mersenne.org/
(Ongoing from 1996).
[16] V. R. Pratt, “Every prime has a succinct certiﬁcate,”
SIAM Journal on Computing 4, 214–220 (1975).
[17] C. Pomerance, “Very short primality proofs,” Mathemat-
ics of Computation 48, 315–322 (1987).
[18] P. W. Shor, “Polynomial-time algorithms for prime fac-
torization and discrete logarithms on a quantum com-
puter,” SIAM Journal on Computing 26, 1484 (1997).
[19] H. F. Chau and H.-K. Lo, “Primality test via quantum
factorization,” International Journal of Modern Physics
C 08, 131–138 (1997).
[20] A. Carlini and A. Hosoya, “Quantum probabilistic sub-
routines and problems in number theory,” Physical Re-
view A 62, 032312 (2000).
[21] J. B. Rosser and L. Schoenfeld, “Approximate formulas
for some functions of prime numbers,” Illinois Journal of
Mathematics 6, 64–94 (1962).
[22] J.-L. Nicolas, “Petites valeurs de la fonction d’Euler,”
Journal of Number Theory 17, 375 – 388 (1983).
[23] D. E. Knuth, The Art of Computer Programming, Vol-
ume 2 (3rd Ed.): Seminumerical Algorithms (Addison-
Wesley Longman Publishing Co., Inc., Boston, MA,
USA, 1997).
[24] V. Vedral, A. Barenco,
and A. Ekert, “Quantum net-
works for elementary arithmetic operations,” Physical
Review A 54, 147–153 (1996).
[25] D. Beckman, A. N. Chari, S. Devabhaktuni,
and J.
Preskill, “Eﬃcient networks for quantum factoring,”
Phys. Rev. A 54, 1034–1063 (1996).
[26] A. Sch¨onhage and V. Strassen, “Schnelle Multiplikation
großer Zahlen,” Computing 7, 281–292 (1971).
[27] C. Zalka, “Fast versions of Shor’s quantum factoring al-
gorithm,” preprint quant-ph/9806084 (1998).
[28] R. Van Meter and K. M. Itoh, “Fast quantum modular
exponentiation,” Physical Review A 71, 052320 (2005).
[29] E. Bach and J. Shallit, Algorithmic Number Theory; Vol-
ume I: Eﬃcient Algorithms (The MIT Press, 1996).
[30] The most usual deﬁnition of Euler liars is the a which
satisfy a
N−1
2
≡
  a
N

mod N for a composite N, where
  a
N

is the Jacobi symbol.
[31] D. J. Bernstein, “Detecting perfect powers in essen-
tially linear time,” Mathematics of Computation 67,
1253–1283 (1998).
